 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Course Modules in  
 
 
COMP102: COMPUTER 
 
 
PROGRAMMING 1    
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
MODULE  4 :  
 
 
  Topic:  Java Programming 
 
 
  Language and Programming 
 
 
  Fundamentals  
 
 
   
 
 
70  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Week Number   4  
Chapter/Unit Number   4  
Topic Title   Java  L anguage and Programming Fundamentals  
Course Outcomes   CO3  Demonstrate  foundational  programming  skills  using  Java,  implementing 
core  programming  constructs  such  as  data  types,  variables,  operators,  and 
input/output operations.  
CO6  Create  well - structured  Java  applications  incorporating  proper  coding 
standards, documentation, and error handling.  
Intended Learning  Lecture:  
Outcomes    
At the end of the chapter, the students will be able to:  
1.   Identify the history and evolution of Java.  
2.   List key features that make Java a widely used language.   
3.   Outline the steps involved in the Java development process.  
4.   Discuss the relevance of Java in today’s programming industry.   
5.   Apply Java syntax rules (case sensitivity, semicolons, braces).  
6.   Declare variables with appropriate data types (int, double, String).  
7.   Explain the concept of memory allocation for variables.  
8.   Use constants and reserved words correctly.  
9.   Identify  and  categorize  common  programming  errors  (syntax,  runtime, 
logical).  
 
Laboratory:  
 
At the end of the chapter, the students will be able to:  
1.   Write  a  Java  program  that  declares  variables  and  performs  basic 
operations.  
2.   Debug syntax and logical errors in a given Java code snippet.  
3.   Experiment with different data types and observe their behavior.  
4.   Create a program that uses constants and reserved words.  
5.   Demonstrate the impact of incorrect memory allocation in variable usage.  
SDG and KLD REGAL100  SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth  
Integration   SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure  
SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities  
REGAL 100:  Responsible Digital Citizens: Technology, Research Ethics, and Online 
Etiquette  
Discussion:  
 
IV. Java Programming Language and Programming Fundamentals  
 
This chapter introduces the fundamental concepts requisite for proficiency in Java programming. We will 
systematically  explore  Java's  historical  context  and  its  salient  characteristics  that  have  established  its 
prominence in the software industry. Detailed   attention will be given to the standard Java development 
process, from code compilation to execution. A primary aim is to impart a comprehensive understanding of 
71  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
core programming constructs: essential Java syntax, the proper declaration and application of data types and 
variables, and the principles governing memory management. Concluding this foundational module, we will 
categorize and analyze common programming e rrors, equipping the learner with critical diagnostic skills. This 
chapter  is  designed  to  provide  the  indispensable  building  blocks  for  all  subsequent  topics  in  Java 
development.  
 
1.   History of Java  
 
I magine a programming language that could run anywhere, on any device. That was the ambitious vision 
behind Java, a language born in the early 1990s at Sun Microsystems. Spearheaded by James Gosling as part 
of the "Green Project," Java was initially conceiv ed for interactive television and embedded devices. Its original 
name was "Oak," inspired by an oak tree outside Gosling's office.  
 
 
However, the internet's explosive growth in the mid - 90s provided Java with its true calling. Its key principle, 
"Write Once, Run Anywhere" (WORA), perfectly aligned with the need for platform - independent applications 
on  the  burgeoning  World  Wide  Web.  By  19 95,  Sun  Microsystems  officially  released  Java,  quickly  gaining 
traction due to its robustness, security features, and object - oriented nature.  
 
Over  the  years,  Java  has  continuously  evolved  with  numerous  updates  and  editions,  including  Java  SE 
(Standard Edition), Java EE (Enterprise Edition), and Java ME (Micro Edition), catering to diverse application 
domains.  In  2010,  Oracle  acquired  Sun  Microsy stems,  taking  over  the  stewardship  of  Java.  Today,  Java 
remains a dominant force in the programming world, powering everything from enterprise - level systems to 
mobile applications  
 
2.   Features of Java  
 
Java's enduring popularity isn't accidental; it's a testament to its powerful and practical features:  
 
•   Platform Independent.   This is Java's most celebrated feature. Java source code is compiled into an 
intermediate format called bytecode. This bytecode can then be executed on any device that has a 
Java Virtual Machine (JVM) installed, regardless of the underlying operating syst em. This means a Java 
program written on Windows can run seamlessly on macOS or Linux, a true embodiment of WORA.  
•   Object - Oriented.    Java is a purely object - oriented programming (OOP) language. This paradigm 
organizes  software  design  around  "objects"  rather  than  functions  and  logic.  OOP  concepts  like 
encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism promote modular, reusable, and maintaina ble code.  
•   Simple.   Compared to its predecessor, C++, Java was designed to be simpler and easier to learn. It 
removes complex features like explicit pointers and operator overloading, reducing the likelihood of 
common programming errors.  
•   Secure.    Java  has  built - in  security  features  that  make  it  suitable  for  developing  network - centric 
applications. The JVM's "sandbox" model provides a secure environment for running untrusted code, 
protecting the user's system from malicious programs.  
•   Robust.    Java emphasizes strong memory management and error handling. It features automatic 
garbage collection, which reclaims memory no longer in use, preventing memory leaks. Its robust 
exception handling mechanism allows developers to gracefully manage runtime   errors.  
72  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
•   Multithreaded.   Java  supports  multithreading,  enabling  programs  to  perform  multiple  tasks 
concurrently.  This  is  crucial  for  creating  responsive  user  interfaces  and  efficient  server - side 
applications.  
•   High Performance.    While Java bytecode is interpreted by the JVM, modern JVMs utilize Just - In - Time 
(JIT) compilers. A JIT compiler converts bytecode into native machine code at runtime, significantly 
improving performance for frequently executed code sections.  
•   Distributed.   Java's  networking  capabilities  are  inherent,  making  it  easy  to  create  distributed 
applications that can communicate across networks.  
 
3.   The Java Programming Language Specification, API, JDK and IDE  
 
Java is an object - oriented programming language with a built - in application programming interface (API) 
that can   contains predefined classes   and interfaces and that can be used to create applications .  
 
Sun releases each version with of a  Java Development Toolkit (JDK)   version .  
o   JDK 1.02 (1995)  
o   JDK 1.1 (1996)  
o   JDK 1.2 (1998)  
o   JDK 1.3 (2000)  
o   JDK 1.4 (2002)  
o   JDK 1.5 (2004) = JDK 5 or Java 5  
o   JDK 1.6 (2006) = JDK 6 or Java 6  
o   JDK 1.7 (2011) = JDK 7 or Java 7  
o   Java SE 8 (2014)  
o   Java SE 9 (2017)  
o   Java SE 10, 11 (2018)  
o   Java SE 12,13 (2019)  
o   Java SE 14, 15 (2020)  
o   Java SE 16,17 (2021)  
o   Java 19 SE   (2023)  
 
Java Development Toolkit (JDK) Editions  
•   Java Standard Edition (Java SE).     Java SE can be used to develop client - side standalone applications 
or applets.  
•   Java Enterprise Edition (Java EE).   Java EE can be used to develop server - side applications such as 
Java servlets and Java Server Pages.  
•   Java Micro Edition (Java ME).   Java ME can be used to develop applications for mobile devices such 
as cell phones.  
 
JDK   consists of a set of separate programs for developing and testing Java programs, each of which is 
invoked from a command line.  
 
There are tools that provide an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for rapidly developing Java 
programs. Editing, compiling, building, debugging, and online help are integrated in one GUI.  
•   NetBeans Open Source by Sun (www.netbeans.org)  
73  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
•   Eclips e , Open Source by IBM (www.eclips.org)  
•   JCreator LE (www.jcreator.com)  
•   JEdit (www.jedit.org)  
•   BlueJ ( www.bluej.org )  
 
4.   Relevance in Today's Industry  
 
Java's  influence  in  the  software  industry  is  immense  and  continues  to  grow.  Its  versatility  and  robust 
ecosystem make it a go - to language for a vast array of applications:  
•   Enterprise Applications.   Java is the backbone of countless large - scale enterprise systems, including 
financial services, e - commerce platforms, and supply chain management. Frameworks like Spring and 
Hibernate are central to building robust and scalable enterprise solutions.  
•   Android App Development.   Java is the primary language for developing native Android applications. 
Millions  of  apps  on  Google  Play  Store  are  built  using  Java,  making  it  a  crucial  skill  for  mobile 
developers.  
•   Big Data Technologies.  Many popular Big Data tools and frameworks, such as Apache Hadoop and 
Apache Spark, are written in Java or have strong Java APIs, making Java essential for processing and 
analyzing massive datasets.  
•   Web Applications.   While JavaScript dominates the frontend, Java remains a strong contender for 
backend web development, powering complex web services and APIs.  
•   Internet  of  Things  (IoT).    Java's  small  footprint  and  platform  independence  make  it  suitable  for 
developing applications for IoT devices, ranging from smart home appliances to industrial sensors.  
•   Scientific Applications.   Its strong numerical capabilities and vast libraries make Java a choice for 
scientific computing and research  
 
5.   Java Development Process  
 
To start programming in Java, you need to download and install the  Java Development Kit (JDK)   from 
the company called Oracle, which makes releases and updates of Java versions. The full name of the 
software to download is Java SE Development Kit. You may download the latest version available or use 
other version of Java SE Development Kit.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 43.  Java SE Development Kit 17.0.1 Downloads Page on the Oracle Website .  
 
 
74  
  Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 

 
  After installing the software, check if the bin directory  C: \ Program Files \ Java \ jdk - 17.0.1 \ bin   from 
Java folder or the  pathname  C: \ Program Files \ Common Files \ Oracle \ Java \ javapat h are included in 
the list of system variables under the variable PATH, otherwise you need add these pathname. Click on 
the  menu  Start,  Control  Panel,  System  and  search  for  Environment  Variables.  You’ll  see  all  system 
variables that exist in your OS As sho wn on the screenshot Windows OS  -   System Variables. If you have 
administrator ’s rights onto your Windows PC, you can set user variables that will apply only when a 
certain user logs into your PC, or system variables that will apply to all users.   
 
 
 
Figure 44.  Setting the Java path in Windows environment variables .  
 
   
  Press  Edit  and  add  the  bin  directory  C: \ Program  Files \ Java \ jdk - 17.0.1 \ bin   from  your  JDK  or 
 
C: \ Program Files \ Common Files \ Oracle \ Java \ javapath   at the beginning of the Path variable value. For 
example, add  c: \ Program Files \ java \ jdk1.8.0 \ bin ; if this is where your JDK is installed:    
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Figure 45.  Modifying the system environment variable to include the Java installation path .  
 
   
 
 
  75  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
Ask ChatGPT   COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 
 

 
Three Main Steps in Java Programming  
  To develop Java programs, we break the process down into three steps.   
1.   Write the program in Java and save it in a file.  
2.   Compile  the  program  to  translate  it  from  Java  language  into  a  special  byte  code  that  JVM 
understands.  
3.   Run the program.  
 
Step 1  –   Write the Program  
  In  writing  java  program,  you  may  use  any  text  editor  such  as  Notepad,  Notepad++,  TextEdit, 
Sublime Text , etc or by using any  Integrated Development Environment (IDE)   to type the code. After 
typing the code, save the file with an extension of .java.  
  For example, if you want to write a program called HelloWorld, enter its code in a text editor. Here is 
the program that prints the words Hello World! on your computer’s screen:  
   
public class  HelloWorld{  
 
public static void main( String[] args){  
 
System.out.println("Hello World!");  
 
}  
}  
   
Save the above code with the name HelloWorld.java in the folder practice. Keep in mind that you are not 
allowed to use blank spaces in Java file names.  
   
Compile the Program  
 
  Now you need to compile this program. A compiler is an application that translates a program from 
the Java language to a language more suitable for executing on the computer. You’ll be using the  javac  
program as Java compiler which is installed on your computer as part of the JDK and can be located in 
the  C: \ Program Files \ Java \ jdk - 17.0.1 \ bin and C: \ Program Files \ Common Files \ Oracle \ Java \ javapath.  
   
The compiler takes a file with a .java extension as input (your program) and produces a file with the same 
name but with a  .class   extension (the computer - language version). To use your Java compiler, type in a 
terminal window the   javac   command followed by the file name of the program you want to compile.  
   
Let’s say that you save your program in the directory called c: \ practice. Select the menus Start, Run and 
enter the word  cmd   to open the command window.   
   
76  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
 
Figure 46.  Launching the Command Prompt for Java program execution .  
  Please take note of the following command that you might use:  
     
Opening the directory  
          cd   -   change directory       example:  cd practice      
            
Ask ChatGPT  
Closing the directory  
        cd .. or cd \    -    .. (current directory) ,  \   (all directory)    
       
 
Creating a directory  
        Mkdir     -   make directory    
       
Ask ChatGPT         Display Directory  
        dir   
     
In your command line proceed to c: \ practice , then type  javac HelloWorld.java.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 47.  Using the javac command to compile HelloWorld.java in the Command Prompt .  
 
   
If you have encountered an error “ javac is not recognized as an internal or external command, 
 
operable program or batch file ”, this means the path for Java JDK commands was not set properly in 
the system variables.   Ask ChatGPT  
 
   
 
77    
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1   Ask ChatGPT  
 

 
 
 
You may set the path at our command line by typing  path = C: \ Program Files \ Java \ jdk - 17.0.1 \ bin.  
   
 
 
Figure 48.  Command Prompt showing setting the Java JDK path and compiling the HelloWorld.java file  
 
You won’t see any confirmation message that your program HelloWorld has been compiled successfully. 
  Having no messages means there no problems occurred during compilation. Type a command dir on 
Windows and you’ll see the list of files in folder practice.  
Ask ChatGPT  
 
You should see a new file named  HelloWorld.class . This proves that your program has been successfully   
compiled. Your original file HelloWorld.java can also be found there.  
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
   
Figure 49.  Command Prompt showing Java compilation and directory listing of HelloWorld files .  
   
If the program has syntax errors, for example you forgot to type the last curly brace or semicolon at the   
end of the line, Java compiler will print an error message. Now you’d need to fix the error, and recompile 
Ask ChatGPT   the program again. If you have several erro rs, you may need to repeat these actions more than once 
until the file HelloWorld.class is created.  
 
 
78  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :     
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
  Ask ChatGPT  

 
 
 
Figure 50.  Compilation error in Command Prompt due to missing semicolon in HelloWorld.java .  
   
Step 3  –   Run the Program    
 
Ask ChatGPT   Once you compile the program, you can run it. With Java, you write the program once, and compile the 
source program into a special type of object code, known as bytecode.  
 
The  bytecode   can then run on any computer with a Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Java Virtual Machine is 
software that  interprets   Java bytecode.    
   
 
Now let’s run the program. In the same Command or Terminal window enter the following:  
      Ask ChatGPT  
java HelloWorld  
 
After running this command, you’ll see the text Hello World! printed in the Terminal window as shown in 
Running HelloWorld.  
 
 
 
Figure 51.  Java program compiled and run successfully in Command Prompt .  
   
 
79   Ask ChatGPT  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1    
 
 

 
Keep in mind that Java does not treat capital and small letters the same, which means that if you originally 
named  the  program  HelloWorld  with  a  capital  H  and  a  capital  W,  do  not  try  to  start  the  program 
helloworld or helloWorld  –   the JRE will signal an er ror. The file name should match the class name as 
well. Typically, each file of your application contains the code of one class.  
 
 
Figure 52.  Steps involved in creating, compiling, and executing a Java program .  
   
Task   Tool to  U se   Output    
Write the program   Any text editor   File with .java extension  
Ask ChatGPT   Compile the program   Java Compiler   File with .class extension (Java bytecodes)  
Run the program   Java Interpreter   Program Output  
 
 
  Table 2.  Steps to Write, Compile, and Run a Java Program  
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
Figure 53.  Flow of Java program execution from source code to output .  
 
80  
Ask ChatGPT   Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
   
 

 
 
 
Writing  Java  Programs Using   NetBeans IDE  
 
•   Create an IDE Project  
•   To create an IDE project:  
•   Launch the NetBeans IDE.  
•   In the NetBeans IDE, choose File | New Project....  
 
 
 
Figure 54.  Creating a New Project in NetBeans IDE 8.0 .  
  •   In the   New Project   wizard, expand the   Java   category and select   Java Application  
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
Figure 55.  Selecting a Java Project Type in NetBeans IDE  
Ask ChatGPT  
81    
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1    
 
 

 
 
•   In the Name and Location page of the wizard, do the following   
•   In the Project Name field, type Hello World App.  
•   In the Create Main Class field, type helloworldapp.HelloWorldApp.  
 
 
 
Figure 56.  Configuring Project Name, Location, and Main Class in NetBeans Java Application Wizard  
  •   Click  Finish.  The  project  is  created  and  opened  in  the  IDE.  You  should  see  the  following 
components:    
•   The Projects window , which contains a tree view of the components of the project, including 
  source files, libraries that your code depends on, and so on.  
•   The   Source Editor   window with a file called HelloWorldApp.java open.  
Ask ChatGPT  
•   The   Navigator window , which you can use to quickly navigate between elements within the 
selected class.  
 
 
Figure 57.  NetBeans IDE displaying Java source code and project files  
 
82    
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1   Ask ChatGPT  
 

 
 
•   Compile the Source File into a .class File .  To compile your source file, choose Run | Build 
Project (Hello World App) from the IDE's main menu.  
 
 
 
Figure 58.  NetBeans workspace with Java source and build results.  
Ask ChatGPT    
•   Run the Program.   From the IDE's menu bar, choose Run | Run Main Project.  
 
Some Tips On Using The IDE   
 
•   Once you have created a project in the IDE, you can add files to the project using the New File 
wizard. Choose File | New File, and then select a template in the wizard  
•   You can compile and run an individual file (as opposed to a whole project) using the IDE's 
Compile File (F9) and Run File (Shift - F6) commands.  
•   You might want to create separate IDE projects for sample applications that include more than 
one source file.  
•   As you are typing in the IDE, a code completion box might periodically appear.  
•   If you want to rename the node for a source file in the Projects window, choose Refactor from 
IDE's main menu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
83  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
6.   Anatomy of Java Program  
 
 
Figure 59.  Breakdown of a  b asic Java  p rogram  s tructure  
Ask ChatGPT    
Comments   -   In Java, comments are preceded by  two slashes (//)   in a line, or  enclosed between /* and 
*/   in one or multiple lines. When the compiler sees //, it ignores all text after // in the same line. When it 
sees /*, it scans for the next */ and ignores any text between /* and */.  
 
Example:  
 
//This is just a comment  
   
  /* This is just a comment */  
 
/*  
  This is just a comment  
*/  
 
Another type of comment is  Javadoc comment . It is represented by  /** and */ . It is used to generate 
code documentation.  
 
Example:  /**    
    * Application that converts inches to centimeters.    
                     *    
                      * @author  Lodel Millo     
                     * @version 01/21/20 25     
                     */  
 
Reserved Words   -   Reserved words or keywords are words that have a specific meaning to the compiler 
and cannot be used for other purposes in the program.  
 
84  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
abstract   else   interface   switch  
assert   enum   long   synchronized  
boolean   extends   native   this  
break   false   new   throw  
byte   final   null   throws  
case   finally   package   transient  
catch   float   private   true  
char   for   protected   try  
class   if   public   void  
continue   implements   return   volatile  
default   import   short   while  
do   instanceof   static    
double   int   super    
abstract   else   interface    
 
Table 3.  Valid Java  r eserved  k eywords  
White Space   –   Spaces, blanks lines and tabs are called white space. White space is used to separate 
words and symbols in a program. Extra white space is ignored. A valid Java program can be formatted 
many ways. Programs should be formatted to enhance readability, usi ng consistent indentation.  
 
Identifiers   –   These are words a programmer uses in a program. An  identifier  can be made up of letters, 
digits, the underscore character (_) and the dollar sign. Identifiers cannot begin with a digit and reserved 
words cannot be used as identifiers. Java is case sensitive: Total, total and TOTAL are different identifiers. 
By conven tion, for class name, the identifier should start with the capital letter for every word in the title. 
While for variable and method name, the first letter of the word should start with the lower case while 
the first letter of the second word should start  with a upper case letter. For constant, the letter should 
be written in all uppercase.  
 
Example : public class  HelloWorld   -   class name  
       final double  MAXIMUM   = 50;  -   constant variable name  
       String  lastName   = “Dela Cruz”;  -   variable name  
       public static void  main (String [] args)  –   method name  
 
Modifiers   -   Java uses certain reserved words called modifiers that specify the properties of the data, 
methods, and classes and how they can be used.   Examples of modifiers are  public   and  static . Other 
modifiers are  private ,  final ,  abstract , and  protected . A  public dat a , method, or class   can be accessed 
by other classes. A  private dat a   or method   cannot be accessed by other classes.  
 
Statements   -   A  statement  represents  an  action  or  a  sequence  of  actions.  The  statement 
System.out.println("Welcome  to  Java!")   in  the  program  is  a  statement  to  display  the  greeting 
"Welcome to Java!" Every statement in Java ends with a  semicolon (;).  
 
85  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Blocks   -   A pair of braces in a program forms a block that groups components of a program. In Java, each 
block begins with an  open brace ({ )   and ends with a  closing brace (}) . Every class has a class block that 
groups the data and methods of the class. Every class has a method block that groups the statements in 
the method. Blocks can be nested, meaning that one block can be placed within another.  
 
Classes   -   The class is the essential Java construct. A  class   is a template or blueprint for objects. To 
program in Java, you must understand classes and be able to write and use them. For now, though, 
understand that a program is defined by using one or more classes. The program file must end with the 
extension .ja va and should have the exact same name as the public class name. So the file name must 
be HelloWorld.java. Every Java program has at least one class.  
 
Methods  
 
What is  System.out.println?   System.out   is known as the standard output object.  println   is a  method : 
a collection of statements that performs a sequence of operations to display a message on the 
console . It can be used even without fully understanding the details of how it works. It is used by invoking 
a statement with a string argument. The string argument is enclosed within parentheses. In this case, 
the argument is "Hello World!" You can call the same   println method with a different argument to print 
a di fferent message.    
 
The  main  Method   -   The  main  method  provides  the  control  of  program  flow.  The  Java  interpreter 
executes the application by invoking the main method. Every Java application must have a user - declared 
main method that defines where the program begins. The main method looks li ke this:   
 
public static void main(String[] args) {   
 
// Statements;   
 
}   
 
Literals .  Literals are tokens that do not change or are constant. The different types of literals in Java are: 
Integer Literals, Floating - Point Literals, Boolean Literals, Character Literals and String Literals.  
•   Integer Literals  -   Integer literals represent whole number like 123 (decimal), o12 (octal), 0xC 
(hexadecimal) , 124L (long)  
•   Floating - Point Literals  -   represent decimals with fractional parts. An example is 3.1415 or 3.2F 
(float)  
•   Boolean Literals  – it have only two values, true or false.  
•   Character Literals  -   Character Literals represent single Unicode characters and it is enclose in 
single quote delimiters like ‘a’  
•   String Literals  -   represent multiple characters and are enclosed by double quotes. An example 
of a string literal is, “Hello World”.  
 
Constants  -   A constant is a variable whose value cannot be changed once it has been initialized. In Java, 
you  declare  a  constant  using  the  final  keyword.  By  convention,  constant  names  are  written  in 
UPPER_CASE with underscores separating word  
86  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
final double PI = 3.14159; // Declaring a constant for PI  
final int MAX_ATTEMPTS = 3; // Another constant  
 
// PI = 3.14; // ERROR! Cannot assign a value to a final variable  
 
7.   Variable   and Data Types  
 
At the heart of any program is the ability to store and manipulate data.  Variables  are named memory 
locations  used  to  hold  data.  Think  of  them  as  labeled  boxes  where  you  can  put  different  kinds  of 
information.  
 
Before you can use a variable, you must declare it, specifying its data type and a name.  
The  data type   determines the kind of data a variable can hold (e.g., whole numbers, decimal numbers, 
text, true/false values) and the amount of memory it will occupy.  
 
Variable Naming Conventions  
 
While  Java  allows  flexibility  in  naming  variables,  following  naming  conventions  is  crucial  for  writing 
readable and maintainable code.  
•   camelCase .   For variables and methods, the first word is lowercase, and subsequent words start 
with an uppercase letter (e.g., firstName, calculateTotalPrice).  
•   PascalCase (or UpperCamelCase).   For class names, each word starts with an uppercase letter 
(e.g., MyClass, ShoppingCart).  
•   Names should be descriptive and meaningful.  
•   Avoid using reserved words   
•   Variable names can start with a letter, _, or $, but traditionally start with a letter. Subsequent 
characters can be letters, digits, _, or $.  
 
Declaring and Initializing Variables  
 
   ;     
    [initial value];  
   
Example:   
 
  int num;                                     - > primitive variable  
              String name = “Hello”;             - >reference variable  
 
Memory Allocation of Variable  
 
Understanding how variables are stored in memory is fundamental to grasping how Java manages 
data. Java primarily uses two areas of memory: the Stack and the Heap.  
 
87  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Stack Memory.   This is where primitive data types (like int, double, boolean) and references to objects 
are stored.   It operates on a Last - In, First - Out (LIFO) principle, similar to a stack of plates.  
Heap  Memory.   This  is  where  objects  (instances  of  classes)  are  stored.    When  you  use  the  new  
keyword (e.g., new String("..."), new Scanner(...)), memory for the object is allocated on the heap.   Heap 
memory is dynamically allocated at runtime, meaning its size can grow or shrink as needed.  
 
 
Figure 60.  Representation of Memory Addressing in a Computer System  
 
Data Types   in  Java has two general kinds of data types.   Primitive Types and Reference Type  
 
Primitive Data Types  
 
Java has eight primitive data types, which are the most basic types of data.  
 
Data Type   Description   Default Value   Size (Bytes)   Example Literals  
byte   Whole numbers, very small range   0   1   10,  - 128, 127  
short   Whole numbers, small range   0   2   1000,  - 32768, 
32767  
int   Whole numbers, common choice   0   4   100000,  - 2*10^9, 
2*10^9  
long   Whole numbers, very large range   0L   8   10000000000L  
float   Single - precision   floating - point  0.0f   4   3.14f, 2.5F  
numbers  
double   Double - precision   floating - point  0.0d   8   3.14159, 2.71828D  
numbers  
char   Single character (Unicode)   \ u0000   2   'A', 'b', '5', ' \ n'  
boolean   Logical values: true or false   false   1 (approx)   true, false  
 
Table 4.  Common Data Types in Programming: Description, Defaults, Sizes, and Examples  
 
// Declaration:  
int score;  
double price;  
88  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
boolean isLoggedIn;  
 
// Initialization (assigning a value for the first time):  
score = 100;  
price = 19.99;  
isLoggedIn = true;  
 
// Declaration and Initialization in one line:  
String firstName = "Alice"; // String is a reference type, but commonly used like primitive for simplicity  
char grade = 'A';  
 
Reference Data Types  
 
Unlike primitive types that store their actual value directly,  reference data   types (like String or any 
object) store a reference (memory address) to where the actual data is located in memory.  
 
String.   Used to store sequences of characters (text). While not a primitive, it's used so frequently that it 
often feels like one.  
 
String message =  "Hello, world!" ;  
 
Objects.   We'll delve deeper into objects in later chapters, but for now, understand that when you create 
an instance of a class (e.g., Scanner for input), you are creating an object, which is a reference type.  
 
Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);  
 
8.   Errors  -   Even experienced programmers make mistakes. Understanding the different types of errors is 
the first step toward effective debugging.  
 
•   Syntax Errors.   Syntax errors are violations of the Java language's grammar rules. These are 
typically caught by the compiler (javac) before your program can even run. The compiler will 
provide error messages indicating the file, line number, and a description of the issu e.  
Common causes:  
o   Missing semicolons (;) at the end of statements.  
o   Misspellings of keywords or variable names (remember, Java is case - sensitive!).  
o   Unmatched braces ({, }, (, ), [, ]).  
o   Incorrect use of operators.  
o   Trying to use a reserved word as a variable name.  
•   Runtime  Errors  (Exceptions).   Runtime  errors,  also  known  as  exceptions,  occur  while  the 
program is executing. These errors are not caught by the compiler but appear during program 
execution, often causing the program to terminate unexpectedly. Java has a robust exception 
handling mecha nism to deal with these, but if unhandled, they lead to a crash.  
Common causes:  
o   ArithmeticException: Attempting to divide by zero (10 / 0).  
89  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
o   ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException:  Trying  to  access  an  element  in  an  array  using  an 
index that is outside its valid range (e.g., accessing the 5th element of a 3 - element array).  
o   NullPointerException: Attempting to use a reference variable that points to null (nothing).  
o   FileNotFoundException: Trying to open a file that does not exist.  
 
•   Logical Errors.  Logical errors are the trickiest to find because they do not cause the program to 
crash or trigger compiler warnings. A program with a logical error will run successfully, but it will 
produce  incorrect  or  unintended  results.  The  program's  logic  simply  does n't  do  what  you 
intended it to do.  
Common causes:  
o   Incorrect mathematical formulas.  
o   Flawed conditions in if statements or loops.  
o   Incorrect order of operations.  
o   Misunderstanding the problem requirements.  
 
 
Laboratory   Exercises  
 
Applying Java Fundamentals  
You are tasked with creating a Java application for a school that needs to process student information and 
calculate their final grade for a specific subject. The application should also demonstrate an understanding 
of different data types and basic error  handling principles  
 
Activity 1.  Grade Calculation and Basic Information Display  
 
Project Setup:  
 
1.   Launch your chosen IDE (NetBeans, Eclipse, etc.).  
2.   Create a new Java Project named StudentGradeApp.  
3.   Inside this project, create a new Java class named GradeProcessor. Ensure it contains the standard 
main method.  
 
Declare and Initialize Variables:  
 
Inside your main method, declare appropriate variables to store the following student information. Choose 
the most suitable data type for each:  
1.   Student's Full Name (e.g., "Juan Dela Cruz")  
2.   Student's ID Number (e.g., "2023 - 0001")  
3.   Subject Name (e.g., "Object - Oriented Programming")  
4.   Scores for three quizzes (e.g., 85, 92, 78)  -   Use integer type for individual scores.  
5.   Score for a midterm exam (e.g., 88)  
6.   Score for a final exam (e.g., 90)  
7.   Initialize each variable with your chosen example values.  
 
Define Constants:  
90  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
Declare constants using the final keyword for the weighting of each component in the final grade calculation. 
Follow Java's naming convention for constants (ALL_CAPS_WITH_UNDERSCORES):  
 
1.   QUIZ_WEIGHT (e.g., 0.30 for 30%)  
2.   MIDTERM_WEIGHT (e.g., 0.30 for 30%)  
3.   FINAL_WEIGHT (e.g., 0.40 for 40%)  
4.   Define a constant for the PASSING_GRADE (e.g., 75.0).  
 
Perform Calculations:  
 
1.   Calculate the average quiz score. Store this in a double variable.  
2.   Calculate the final numerical grade using the formula:  
3.   Final Grade = (Average Quiz Score * QUIZ_WEIGHT) + (Midterm Score * MIDTERM_WEIGHT) + (Final 
Exam Score * FINAL_WEIGHT)  
4.   Store this in a double variable.  
5.   Determine if the student passed or failed the subject. This should be a boolean variable (hasPassed) 
based on whether the Final Grade is greater than or equal to the PASSING_GRADE constant.  
 
Display Output:  
 
1.   Print all the student's declared information (Name, ID, Subject, individual scores).  
2.   Print the calculated average quiz score.  
3.   Print the final numerical grade.  
4.   Print whether the student passed or failed the subject (e.g., "Did the student pass? true" or "Did the 
student pass? false").  
5.   Ensure  your  output  is  clear,  well - labeled,  and  easy  to  read,  incorporating  appropriate  text 
descriptions.  
 
Activity 2: Simple Employee Payroll Calculator  
 
Objectives:   
1.   To implement a Java program that calculates employee payroll using various data types and 
arithmetic operations.   
2.   To effectively use constants for values that do not change, such as tax rates.   
3.   To choose appropriate data types for financial calculations.  
 
Materials:  
•   Computer with Java Development Kit (JDK) installed.  
•   Integrated Development Environment (IDE) like NetBeans or Eclipse.  
 
Scenario:  
 
91  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
You need to create a simple payroll system for a small company. The system should calculate an employee's 
gross pay, tax deduction, and net pay based on their hourly wage and hours worked. A fixed tax rate applies 
to all employees.  
 
Instructions:  
 
Project Setup:  
1.   Create a new Java Project in your IDE named PayrollCalculatorApp.  
2.   Create a new Java class named EmployeePayroll.  
 
Declare Employee Data:  
1.   Declare a String variable for employeeName (e.g., "Alice Wonderland").  
2.   Declare an int variable for hoursWorked (e.g., 40).  
3.   Declare a double variable for hourlyRate (e.g., 25.50).  
 
Define Constants:  
1.   Declare a constant named TAX_RATE (e.g., 0.15 for 15%) as a final double.  
2.   Declare a constant named OVERTIME_THRESHOLD (e.g., 40) as a final int.  
3.   Declare a constant named OVERTIME_MULTIPLIER (e.g., 1.5) as a final double.  
 
 
Perform Calculations:  
1.   Calculate grossPay before taxes. Consider if hoursWorked exceeds OVERTIME_THRESHOLD. If so, 
calculate overtime pay (hours over threshold * overtime multiplier * hourly rate) and add to 
regular pay. Otherwise, grossPay is simply hoursWorked * hourlyRate.  
2.   Calculate taxDeduction (grossPay * TAX_RATE).  
3.   Calculate netPay (grossPay  -   taxDeduction).  
 
Display Results:  
1.   Print the employeeName, hoursWorked, and hourlyRate.  
2.   Print the calculated grossPay, taxDeduction, and netPay.  
3.   Ensure all monetary values are displayed with appropriate precision (e.g., two decimal places).  
 
Activity 3: Geometric Shape Properties  
 
Objectives:  
1.   To write a Java program that calculates properties of basic geometric shapes.  
2.   To apply knowledge of different numerical data types (int, double) and their precision.  
3.   To use constants for mathematical values like PI.  
 
Materials:  
•   Computer with Java Development Kit (JDK) installed.  
•   Integrated Development Environment (IDE) like NetBeans or Eclipse.  
 
92  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Scenario:  
•   You  are  developing  a  utility  tool  for  architects  to  quickly  calculate  the  area  and 
perimeter/circumference of common shapes like rectangles and circles.  
 
Instructions:  
 
Project Setup:  
•   Create a new Java Project named GeometryCalcApp.  
•   Create a new Java class named ShapeProperties.  
 
Declare Shape Dimensions:  
•   For a Rectangle: Declare int variables rectLength (e.g., 15) and rectWidth (e.g., 8).  
•   For a Circle: Declare a double variable circleRadius (e.g., 7.25).  
 
Define Constants:  
•   Declare a constant named PI (e.g., 3.14159) as a final double.  
 
Perform Calculations:  
•   Rectangle:  
o   Calculate areaRectangle (rectLength * rectWidth).  
o   Calculate perimeterRectangle (2 * (rectLength + rectWidth)).  
•   Circle:  
o   Calculate areaCircle (PI * circleRadius * circleRadius).  
o   Calculate circumferenceCircle (2 * PI * circleRadius).  
Display Results:  
•   Print the dimensions for each shape (length, width, radius).  
•   Print the calculated area and perimeter/circumference for each shape, clearly labeled.  
•   Ensure floating - point results show appropriate precision.  
 
Activity 4: Shopping Cart Totalizer  
Objectives:  
1.   To build a program that calculates a total bill for a shopping cart, incorporating discounts and sales 
tax.  
2.   To reinforce the use of double for monetary values and prevent precision issues.  
3.   To effectively use constants for discount rates and tax percentages.  
4.   To demonstrate variable interaction and value updates conceptually.  
 
Materials:  
•   Computer with Java Development Kit (JDK) installed.  
•   Integrated Development Environment (IDE) like NetBeans or Eclipse.  
 
Scenario:  
•   You're helping a small online store prototype a simple shopping cart totalizer. It needs to list a few 
items, calculate a subtotal, apply a discount, then add sales tax to get the final total.  
 
93  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Instructions:  
•   Project Setup:  
o   Create a new Java Project named ShoppingCartApp.  
o   Create a new Java class named CartTotalizer.  
 
•   Declare Item Variables:  
o   Declare variables for at least three different items, each with a String for its name, an int for 
its quantity, and a double for its unitPrice.  
Example: itemName1 = "Laptop", itemQty1 = 1, itemPrice1 = 1200.00  
Example: itemName2 = "Mouse", itemQty2 = 2, itemPrice2 = 25.50  
Example: itemName3 = "Keyboard", itemQty3 = 1, itemPrice3 = 75.00  
 
Define Constants:  
•   Declare constants using the final keyword:  
o   DISCOUNT_RATE (e.g., 0.10 for 10% off)  
o   SALES_TAX_RATE (e.g., 0.08 for 8% sales tax)  
 
Perform Calculations:  
o   Calculate the subtotal for each item (quantity * unitPrice).  
o   Calculate the grandSubtotal (sum of all item subtotals).  
o   Calculate the discountAmount (grandSubtotal * DISCOUNT_RATE).  
o   Calculate subtotalAfterDiscount (grandSubtotal  -   discountAmount).  
o   Calculate taxAmount (subtotalAfterDiscount * SALES_TAX_RATE).  
o   Calculate the finalTotal (subtotalAfterDiscount + taxAmount).  
 
Demonstrate Variable Update :  
•   Before calculating the finalTotal, declare a double variable named promoBalance = grandSubtotal;.  
•   Then, apply the discount to promoBalance directly (promoBalance  - = discountAmount;).  
•   Print promoBalance at this step.  
 
•   Comment on how promoBalance reflects the current state of the calculation, demonstrating that 
variable values can be updated incrementally and how intermediate results affect the final outcome.  
 
Display Detailed Receipt:  
•   Print the name, quantity, and unit price for each item.  
•   Print the grandSubtotal.  
•   Print the discountAmount.  
•   Print the subtotalAfterDiscount.  
•   Print the taxAmount.  
•   Print the finalTotal.  
•   Ensure all monetary values are formatted to two decimal places.  
 
 
 
94  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Outcomes - Based  Output 1. Self - Check  
Assessment    
1.   Which company was originally responsible for the creation of Java in the early 
1990s?  
a) IBM  
b) Microsoft  
c) Sun Microsystems  
d) Oracle  
2.   What  is  the  primary  benefit  of  Java's  "Write  Once,  Run  Anywhere"  (WORA) 
principle?  
a) It makes Java programs faster to execute.  
b) It allows Java programs to run on any device with a JVM, regardless of the 
operating system.  
c) It simplifies the process of writing code by removing syntax rules.  
d) It ensures that Java is the most secure programming language.  
3.   Which of the following is typically the last step in the Java programming process 
when using a command - line interface?  
a) Writing the .java file  
b) Compiling the .java file into bytecode  
c) Saving the file with a .class extension  
d) Running the .class file using the JVM  
4.   Which Java primitive data type is used to store single characters?  
a) String  
b) int  
c) char  
d) boolean  
5.   What type of error is typically indicated by a message from the javac compiler?  
a) Runtime error  
b) Logical error  
c) Syntax error  
d) Semantic error  
6.   Which Java primitive data type is used to store single characters?  
a) String  
b) int  
c) char  
d) boolean  
7.   Which of the following is an example of a reference data type in Java?  
a) int  
b) double  
c) boolean  
d) String  
8.   In Java, a block of code is typically enclosed by which symbols?  
a) ( )  
b) [ ]  
c) { }  
95  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
d) < >  
9.   What is the correct way to end a statement in Java?  
a) A colon (:)  
b) A period (.)  
c) A semicolon (;)  
d) A comma (,)  
10.   True  /  False:  Java  is  a  case - sensitive  language,  meaning  myVariable  and 
MyVariable are treated as different identifiers.  
11.   True / False: The Java Development Kit (JDK) only contains the Java Runtime 
Environment (JRE) and does not include a compiler.  
12.   True / False: A constant in Java is declared using the const keyword.  
13.   True / False: White space (spaces, blank lines, tabs) is ignored by the Java 
compiler and is primarily used to enhance code readability.  
14.   In Java, what is the purpose of the main method?  
15.   What is the standard naming convention (e.g., camelCase, PascalCase) for 
variable names in Java? Provide an example.  
 
Output  2 .  Applying Java Fundamentals  
 
Student Deliverables  
Component   Description  
1.   Activity 1: Grade  C reate a Java program to store student details 
Calculation and Basic  and grades, calculate an average, and display all 
Information Display   information.  
 
2.   Simple Employee Payroll  D evelop a Java program to compute gross and 
Calculator   net  pay  using  employee  data,  including 
calculations with variables and constants.  
3.   Activity 3: Geometric  W rite a Java program to calculate and display 
Shape Properties   properties  (e.g.,  area,  perimeter)  of  basic 
geometric shapes using variables, data types, and 
mathematical operations.  
4.   Activity 4: Shopping Cart  C reate a Java program to calculate the total cost 
Totalizer   of items in a simple shopping cart, practicing 
variable declaration, arithmetic, and output.  
 
Rubrics  
Criteria   Exemplary    (4  Proficient (3 points)   Developing   (2  Beginning (1 point)  
points)   points)  
Project   Setup,  Project    and  Project    and  Project  or  class  Project  or  class 
Structure  &  Code  class(es)    are  class(es)    are  setup  has  minor  setup is incorrect or 
Organization   flawlessly set up in  correctly  set  up.  issues    (e.g.,  incomplete. Code is 
the  IDE  (e.g.,  Code  is  generally  incorrect  naming,  highly disorganized, 
NetBeans,  Eclipse)  well - organized and  missing    main  illogical,     or 
with  the  standard  logical,  method).   Code  practically 
main method. Code  demonstrating  organization   is  unreadable, 
is   exceptionally  good readability.   inconsistent   or  showing little to no 
well - organized,  somewhat  difficult  adherence to basic 
logical, and easy to  to follow in parts.   structure.  
96  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
navigate, 
demonstrating best 
practices    in 
modularity   and 
readability.  
Variable & Constant  All  variables  are  All  variables  are  Some variables are  Variables    are 
Declaration  (Data  declared using the  declared   with  declared  with  less  incorrectly 
Types & Naming)   most  suitable  and  suitable data types  suitable data types,  declared  or  use 
precise  data types  for  their  purpose,  potentially  leading  inappropriate  data 
(e.g.,  String,  int,  with     minor  to minor precision  types,  leading  to 
double,  boolean)  exceptions    in  issues or inefficient  significant errors in 
for  their  intended  optimal  precision.  memory   usage.  calculation or data 
purpose, effectively  Constants   are  Constants   may  representation. 
preventing  defined  correctly  have  minor  errors  Constants   are 
precision issues for  with  final  and  in  definition  or  missing,  incorrect, 
financial    or  mostly follow Java  inconsistent  or   show   no 
floating - point  naming  naming  adherence to final 
values.     All  conventions.   conventions.   keyword or naming 
constants    are  conventions.  
correctly  defined 
u sing  final  and 
adhere  strictly  to 
Java    naming 
conventions 
(ALL_CAPS).  
Calculations  All   calculations  All calculations are  One  or  more  Calculations 
Accuracy & Logic   required  by  the  mathematically  calculations contain  contain  significant 
activity    are  accurate    and  minor  mathematical 
mathematically  logically  mathematical  errors  or  major 
flawless    and  implemented,  errors  or  logical  logical    flaws, 
logically  handling   most  flaws,  or  fail  to  rendering  results 
implemented,  specified  correctly  handle  incorrect  or  the 
effectively handling  conditions  specific conditions,  program   non -
all    specified  correctly.  leading     to  functional  for  its 
conditions  (e.g.,  Intermediate  and  occasionally  intended  purpose. 
overtime   pay,  final  results  are  incorrect results.   Many  conditions 
pass/fail   logic,  generally accurate.   are not handled.  
discounts,   tax). 
Intermediate  and 
final  results  are 
consistently 
accurate.  
Output   Display,  All    required  All    required  Some   required  Output  is 
Formatting    &  information  and  information  and  information   or  incomplete, 
Clarity   results     are  results     are  results are missing,  unformatted,  or 
displayed  displayed  clearly  poorly  labeled,  or  extremely  difficult 
exceptionally  with good labeling.  inconsistently  to   understand. 
clearly,  concisely,  Most   monetary  formatted,  making  Monetary  values 
and with excellent,  values     are  the  output  harder  are  not  formatted 
consistent labeling.  formatted correctly  to read or interpret.  or show significant 
Monetary  values  to   appropriate  Monetary  values  precision  issues. 
are    flawlessly  decimal   places.  may lack consistent  Key  information  is 
formatted    to  Output is generally  appropriate  missing     or 
appropriate  easy to read.   precision.   misleading.  
decimal   places 
(e.g.,  two  decimal 
places  for 
currency),  and  all 
output  is  easy  to 
read and interpret.    
 
 
97  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
References/Resources:  
 
Schildt, H. (2022). Java: A beginner's guide (9th ed.). McGraw - Hill Education.  
 
Ploetz, A. (2024). Code with Java 21. BPB Publications. https://www.perlego.com/book/4334809  
 
Lowe, D. (2023). Java all - in - one for dummies (7th ed.). For Dummies. 
https://www.perlego.com/book/3815078  
 
Kanetkar,    Y.    (2020).    Let    us    Java    [Edition    unavailable].    BPB    Publications. 
https://www.perlego.com/book/2028289  
 
Other Suggested Readings:   
 
W3Schools. (n.d.). Java  -   Get started. https://www.w3schools.com/java/java_getstarted.asp  
 
Oracle. (n.d.). Getting started with Java. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/getStarted/index.html  
 
Programiz. (2021). Install Java and setup environment. https://www.programiz.com/java -
programming/installation  
 
TutorialsPoint. (n.d.). Java environment setup. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/java/java_environment.htm  
 
GeeksforGeeks. (n.d.). Introduction to Java. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction - to - java/  
 
Guru99. (2021). How to install Java. https://www.guru99.com/how - to - install - java.html  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98  
Course Modules in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 