 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Course Module   in  
 
 
COMP102: COMPUTER 
 
 
PROGRAMMING 1    
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
MODULE 3:  
 
 
  Topic:  Introduction to 
 
 
  Flowcharting and 
 
 
  Programming  
 
 
   
 
 
42  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
 
Week Number   2 - 3  
Chapter/Unit Number   3  
Topic Title   Introduction to Flowcharting and Programming  
Course Outcomes   CO2 Apply problem - solving techniques and the software development life cycle by 
analyzing  and  interpreting  source  code,  flowcharts,  and  algorithms  to  design 
efficient programming solutions.  
Intended Learning  Lecture:  
Outcomes    
At the end of the chapter, the students will be able to:  
1.   Define algorithm, pseudocode, and flowchart with examples.  
2.   Construct algorithms using pseudocode for simple computational tasks.  
3.   Diagram problem - solving logic using standard flowchart symbols.  
4.   Translate a given algorithm into a corresponding flowchart representation  
 
Laboratory:  
1.   Construct pseudocode or flowcharts representing a logical plan for solving a 
problem.  
2.   Evaluate a given flowchart for logical correctness.  
 
SDG and KLD  SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth  
REGAL100 Integration   SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure  
SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities  
REGAL 100:  Responsible Digital Citizens: Technology, Research Ethics, and Online 
Etiquette  
Discussion  
 
III. Introduction to Flowcharting and Programming  
 
Every task, big or small, that a computer performs, from launching an application to playing a complex video 
game, relies on a series of precise instructions. These instructions, when organized logically to solve a specific 
problem, form the foundation of  what we call an algorithm. Before we even begin to write a single line of 
code in any programming language, we must first understand what needs to be done and how it should be 
done. This initial phase of problem - solving and planning is crucial and is where   algorithms , pseudocode   and 
flowcharts come into play. They serve as blueprints, guiding us through the process of transforming a real -
world problem into a set of instructions that a computer can understand and execute.  
 
1.   What is an Algorithm?  
 
An algorithm is a finite set of well - defined, unambiguous instructions to solve a problem or accomplish a task. 
Think of it as a recipe: it provides a step - by - step guide on how to prepare a dish. Similarly, an algorithm 
provides a step - by - step guide on how   to achieve a desired outcome using a computer.  
 
Key characteristics of a good algorithm:  
43  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
•   Finite.   It must terminate after a finite number of steps. It cannot go on forever.  
•   Well - defined/Unambiguous.  Each   step  must  be  clear  and  precise,  leaving  no  room  for 
misinterpretation. There should be only one way to interpret each instruction.  
•   Input.   It must accept zero or more inputs.  
•   Output.   It must produce one or more outputs.  
•   Effective.   Each step must be sufficiently basic that it can, in principle, be done exactly and in a finite 
amount of time by a person using pencil and paper.  
 
Example   1 .   A simple algorithm for making a cup of coffee.  
 
1.   Boil water.  
2.   Place coffee grounds in a filter.  
3.   Place filter in coffee maker.  
4.   Pour hot water over coffee grounds.  
5.   Wait for coffee to brew.  
6.   Pour coffee into a cup.  
7.   Add sugar and milk (optional).  
8.   Enjoy your coffee.  
 
Example 2 .   Finding a Book in a Library .  
 
1.   Go to the library's catalog system (computer or card catalog).  
2.   Search for the book by title or author.  
3.   Note down the call number of the book.  
4.   Go to the section of the library corresponding to the first part of the call number.  
5.   Locate the specific shelf using the rest of the call number.  
6.   Find the book on the shelf.  
7.   If found, take the book. If not, recheck the call number or ask for assistance.  
 
Example 3.  Getting the Product of Two Numbers .  
1.   Take the first number as input.  
2.   Take the second number as input.  
3.   Multiply the first number by the second number.  
4.   The result of the multiplication is the product.  
5.   Display the product.  
 
Example  4 .  Checking if a Number is Even or Odd .  
 
1.   Take an integer number as input.  
2.   Divide the number by 2.  
3.   Check the remainder of the division.  
4.   If the remainder is 0, the number is even.  
5.   If the remainder is not 0 (it will be 1 for integers), the number is odd.  
44  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
Example  5 .   Write a solution on how to find the average grades of a class of 10 students  
 
1.   Identify the grades of the 10 students.  
2.   Add all the grades.  
3.   Divide the total of the grades by 10.  
4.   Round off the answer by two decimal places.  
5.   Show the result.  
 
2.   Formulating Algorithms using Pseudocode  
 
Pseudocode  is an artificial and informal language that helps programmers develop algorithms. It is a "text -
based" representation that describes the steps of an algorithm without strictly adhering to the syntax rules 
of any programming language. It acts as a bridge be tween human language and programming language, 
making it easier to translate the algorithm into actual code.  
 
Key characteristics of Pseudocode:  
•   Easy for humans to understand.  
•   Avoids unnecessary details.  
•   Uses common control structures like IF - THEN - ELSE, WHILE, FOR, DO - WHILE, etc., to represent 
decision - making and repetition.  
•   Not tied to any specific programming language.  
 
General Guidelines for Writing Pseudocode:  
 
•   Use simple, clear English statements.  
•   Indent code blocks to show hierarchy and structure (e.g., inside loops or conditional statements).  
•   Use keywords for control structures (e.g., START, END, READ, WRITE, IF, ELSE, WHILE, FOR, 
FUNCTION).  
•   Variables should be descriptive.  
 
Common Pseudocode Constructs:  
 
Variables   -   DECLARE variable_name AS data_type (e.g., DECLARE age AS INTEGER)  
 
Assignment   -   SET variable_name TO value or variable_name = value (e.g., SET total TO 0)  
 
Input  -   GET input_variable or READ input_variable (input)  
 
Output  -   DISPLAY output_variable or PRINT output_variable (output)  
 
Conditional Statements:  
 
IF condition THEN  
// statements if condition is true  
45  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
ELSE  
// statements if condition is false  
END IF  
 
 
Looping Constructs:  
 
While Loop:  
 
WHILE condition DO  
// statements to repeat  
END WHILE  
 
For Loop:  
 
FOR counter FROM start_value TO end_value STEP increment DO  
// statements to repeat  
END FOR  
 
Repeat - Until Loop:  
 
REPEAT  
// statements to repeat  
UNTIL condition  
 
Functions/Procedures:  
 
FUNCTION function_name(parameters)  
// statements  
RETURN value  
END FUNCTION  
 
Example  1 : Algorithm to find the sum of two numbers.  
 
START  
     READ number1  
     READ number2  
     CALCULATE sum = number1 + number2  
     DISPLAY sum  
END  
 
Example 2: Algorithm to determine the area of rectangle.  
 
BEGIN  
     INPUT length  
46  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
     INPUT width  
     CALCULATE area = length * width  
     PRINT area  
END  
 
Example  3 : Algorithm to determine if a student passed or failed (passing score is 70).  
 
START  
     READ student_score  
     IF student_score >= 70 THEN  
         DISPLAY "Passed"  
     ELSE  
         DISPLAY "Failed"  
     END IF  
END  
 
Example 4: Algorithm to determine if the number is Positive, Negative or equals to Zero  
 
BEGIN  
     INPUT number  
     IF number > 0 THEN  
         PRINT "Positive"  
     ELSE IF number < 0 THEN  
         PRINT "Negative"  
     ELSE  
         PRINT "Zero"  
     END IF  
END  
 
Example   5 : Algorithm to Calculate the  Product   of Two Numbers using Pseudocode  
 
// Algorithm:  Product _Two_Numbers  
// Description: This algorithm reads two numbers from the user and calculates their  product .  
 
START  
 
     DECLARE num1 AS INTEGER  
     DECLARE num2 AS INTEGER  
     DECLARE sum AS INTEGER  
 
     DISPLAY "Enter the first number: "  
     GET num1  
 
     DISPLAY "Enter the second number: "  
     GET num2  
47  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
     SET sum TO num1  *   num2  
 
     DISPLAY "The  product   is: ", sum  
 
END  
 
Example   6 : W HILE Loop  -   Summing numbers until a negative input  
 
BEGIN  
     SET total_sum = 0  
     INPUT number  
     WHILE number >= 0 DO  
         total_sum = total_sum + number  
         INPUT number  
     END WHILE  
     PRINT "Sum of non - negative numbers:", total_sum  
END  
 
Example   7 :  FOR Loop  -   Printing numbers from 1 to 5  
 
BEGIN  
     FOR counter FROM 1 TO 5 STEP 1 DO  
         PRINT counter  
     END FOR  
END  
 
Example   8 :  REPEAT...UNTIL Loop  -   Input validation  
 
BEGIN  
     DECLARE password AS STRING  
     REPEAT  
         PRINT "Enter password:"  
         INPUT password  
     UNTIL password IS EQUAL TO "secret123"  
     PRINT "Access granted."  
END  
 
3.  Formulating Algorithms using Flowchart  
 
While algorithms describe  what   and how in a textual format, flowcharts provide a graphical representation 
of an algorithm. They use standard symbols to depict the different types of operations and the flow of control 
within an algorithm. Flowcharts are invaluable tools for visualizing  the logic of a program, making it easier to 
understand, debug, and communicate complex processes.  
 
48  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
Advantages of using Flowcharts  
•   Provides a clear and visual representation of the logic, making it easier to explain complex 
processes to others.  
•   Helps in analyzing the logic of a problem, identifying potential bottlenecks, redundancies, or errors 
before coding.  
•   Facilitates debugging by allowing programmers to trace the flow of control and identify where 
errors might occur.  
•   Serves as a valuable form of program documentation, aiding in maintenance and future 
modifications.  
•   Promotes efficient coding by encouraging a systematic approach to problem - solving.  
Common Flowcharting Symbols  
 
 
 
Figure 28.    Flowchart symbols with names and functions used in algorithm design.  
  Constructing a Flowchart: Step - by - Step  
   
•   Understand the Problem. Clearly define what the algorithm needs to achieve.  
  •   Identify Inputs and Outputs. What data is needed, and what results should be produced?  
 
49  
Ask ChatGPT  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
•   Break Down the Problem. Divide the problem into smaller, manageable steps.  
•   Determine the Sequence. Arrange the steps in a logical order.  
•   Use Appropriate Symbols. Select the correct flowchart symbol for each step.  
•   Connect Symbols with Flow Lines. Use arrows to show the direction of execution.  
•   Test the Flowchart. Mentally trace the flow of control with different inputs to ensure it works 
correctly.  
 
The following rules should be followed while creating program flowcharts  
•   Only the standard symbols should be used in program flowcharts.  
•   The program logic should depict the flow from top to bottom and from left to right.  
•   Each symbol used in a program flowchart should contain only one entry point and one exit point, 
except for the decision symbol. This is known as the single rule.  
•   The operations shown within a symbol of a program flowchart should be expressed independently 
of any programming language.  
•   All decision branches should be well - labeled.  
•   On - page connectors are referenced using numbers  
•   Off - page connectors are referenced using alphabets  
•   Arrows should not cross each other  
 
Flowchart Example  –   Sum of Two Numbers  
 
 
Figure 29.    Example flowchart illustrating the addition of two numbers (529 and 256).  
 
  50  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
 
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
  Ask ChatGPT  

 
 
 
Flowchart Example  –   Compute the Area of Circle  
The flowchart example below shows  an algorithm to compute the area of circle.  
 
 
Figure 30.    Flowchart for calculating the area of a circle given its radius.  
  Flowchart Example  –   Temperature Conversion  
   
The flowchart example below shows  an algorithm to covert temperature from Fahrenheit to Celsius.  
   
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
Figure 31.    Flowchart for converting temperature from Fahrenheit to Celsius.  
 
51    
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1    
 
Ask ChatGPT  

 
Flowcharts for decision making  
 
Computers are used extensively for performing various types of analysis. The decision symbol is used in 
flowcharts to indicate it.   The general format of steps for flowcharting is as follows:  
•   Perform the test of the condition.  
•   If condition evaluates true branch to Yes steps.  
•   If condition evaluates false branch to No steps.  
 
 
Figure 3 2 .  Decision - making flowchart symbol directing flow based on a Yes or No response.  
   
Flowchart showing a decision symbol with two selection options    
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
Figure 33.  Flowchart illustrating conditional branching for true and false outcomes .  
   
   
 
  Flowchart showing multiple selections options  
 
52  
Ask ChatGPT   Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 34.  Flowchart depicting a   s equential  e valuation of  m ultiple  c onditions  u sing If - Else  l ogic .  
   
Flowchart Example  –   Calculate Profit and Loss    
The flowchart example below shows how profit and loss can be calculated.  
     
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Figure 35.  Flowchart to calculate profit or loss based on income and cost.  
 
  53  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
  COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
   
Ask ChatGPT  

 
Flowchart Example: High est Number  
The flowchart example below shows   algorithm   to determine which is highest between two number.  
 
 
 
Figure 36.  Flowchart to compare two numbers and print the greater one.  
  Flowchart Example: Passed or Failed  
The flowchart example shows algorithm to determine the student final grade if Passed or Failed.    
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
Figure 37.  Flowchart to calculate the average of prelim, midterm, and final grades and determine if the student passed .  
 
54  
 
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 
 
 

 
 
Flowchart Example: Types of Triangles  
 
The flowchart example shows algorithm to check if triangle is equilateral, isosceles or scalene.  
 
 
 
Figure 3 8 .  Flowchart to determine the type of triangle based on the lengths of its sides .  
 
  55  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
  COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Flowcharts for Loops  
 
Looping refers to the repeated use of one or more steps. i.e. the statement or block of statements within 
the loop are executed repeatedly. There are two types of loops.   
•   One is known as the fixed loop where the operations are repeated a fixed number of times. In this 
case, the values of the variables within the loop have no effect on the number of times the loop is to 
be executed.   
•   In the other type which is known as the variable loop, the operations are repeated until a specific 
condition is met. Here, the number of times the loop is repeated can vary.  
 
The loop process in general includes :  
•   Setting and initializing a counter  
•   Execution of operations  
•   Testing the completion of operations  
•   Incrementing the counter  
•   The test could either be to determine whether the loop has executed the specified number of times, 
or whether a specified condition has been met.  
 
 
Figure  39 .  Flowchart showing a loop that executes while a condition is true .  
 
  56  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
  COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
   
Ask ChatGPT  

 
 
Example: Flowchart to print numbers from 1 to 10  
 
 
  (a)  
(b)  
 
 
Figure  40 .  Flowcharts representing (a) a  pre - test loop   and (b) a  post - test   loop for outputting numbers from 1 to 
 
10  
 
  Example: Flowchart to compute the sum of numbers from 1 to 5.  
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Ask ChatGPT  
 
 
 
Figure 41.  Flowchart to calculate the sum of numbers from 1 to 5 using a loop .  
 
   
 
 
 
 
57  
Ask ChatGPT   Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 
 
 

 
Example: Flowchart to print all the even numbers from 1  to 15.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 42.  Flowchart to display even numbers between 1 and 15 using a counter and remainder check .  
 
   
 
 
Laboratory   Exercises  
   
Applied Flowcharting and Problem - Solving  
Ask ChatGPT    
Activity 1: Problem - Solving Blueprint Challenge    
 
  I nstructions: For each of your assigned problems, you will develop a complete logical plan in two formats: 
Pseudocode and a Flowchart. Ensure your solutions are clear, unambiguous, use standard conventions, and   
correctly solve the given problem.  
Ask ChatGPT    
Materials: Computer with flowcharting software (e.g., Draw.io, Lucidchart), pen/pencil, paper.  
 
Procedure:  
 
1.   Read your assigned problems carefully.  
2.   First, develop the Pseudocode: Write the step - by - step algorithm in pseudocode format.  
3.   Second, create the Flowchart: Translate your pseudocode into a visual flowchart using standard 
flowcharting symbols. Use the designated flowcharting software.  
58  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
4.   Submit both your pseudocode (typed or clearly written) and your flowchart (digital file).  
Problem Set for Lab Activity 1:  
 
Problem 1: Simple Calculator (Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, Division)  
Design a logical plan that takes two numbers and an operator (+,  - , *, /) as input. It should then perform the 
specified operation and display the result. Handle division by zero (display an error message if the second 
number is zero and the operator is di vision).  
 
Problem 2: Student Grade Classifier  
Design a logical plan that takes a student's numerical score (0 - 100) as input. It should then output "Pass" if 
the score is 60 or above, and "Fail" if the score is below 60. Additionally, if the score is 90 or above, also 
output "With Honors".  
 
Problem 3: Sum of Positive Numbers  
Design a logical plan that continuously takes numbers as input from the user. The process should stop 
when the user enters a negative number. At that point, it should display the sum of all the positive numbers 
entered.  
 
Problem 4: Count Vowels in a Word  
Design a logical plan that takes a single word (string) as input. It should count how many vowels (a, e, i, o, u, 
case - insensitive) are present in the word and display the total count.  
 
Problem 5: Even or Odd Number Checker with Loop  
Design a logical plan that repeatedly asks the user to enter an integer. For each number entered, it should 
determine and display whether the number is "Even" or "Odd". The process should continue until the user 
enters 0.  
 
b.   Activity 2: Flowchart Evaluation and Debugging  
Instructions:  C arefully examine each of the provided flowcharts. Each flowchart has one or more logical 
errors or adherence issues. Your task is to:  
 
•   Understand what the flowchart is attempting to do.  
•   Identify and clearly describe ALL errors or issues you find.  
•   Propose a correction for each identified error.  
 
Recreate the original faulty flowchart in your software, then make the necessary corrections to produce a 
logically sound and correct flowchart. Submit both your written analysis and your corrected flowchart file.  
 
Materials: Lab Handout with faulty flowcharts, computer with flowcharting software, pen/pencil, paper.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
59  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Faulty Flowcharts for Lab Activity 2  
 
Faulty Flowchart 1: Average Calculator   
 
 
 
Faulty Flowchart  2 : Age Eligibility  ( Child/Teen <18, Adult >=18. Senior >59)   
 
 
 
 
60  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Faulty Flowchart  3 : Login System   
 
 
 
 
Faulty Flowchart  4 : Number Counter    (Print numbers from 10 to 50 with 5 step increment)  
 
 
 
Activity 3: Algorithm Optimization Challenge  
 
Instructions: For each of the problems below, you are given a description and an existing (but possibly 
inefficient) pseudocode/flowchart solution. Your task is to:  
61  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
•   Analyze the provided solution .  What is it trying to do? Are there any obvious inefficiencies or 
unnecessary complexities?  
•   Critique .  Write down your observations and point out specific areas where the solution could be 
improved.  
•   Optimize .  Design and create a new, optimized pseudocode and flowchart that solves the problem 
more efficiently or clearly.  
 
Materials: Computer with flowcharting software, pen/pencil, paper.  
 
Problem Set for Lab Activity 3:  
 
Problem 1: Number Sign Checker   
Problem Description: Determine if a given number is positive, negative, or zero.  
 
START  
     READ number  
     IF number > 0 THEN  
         DISPLAY "Positive"  
     END IF  
     IF number < 0 THEN  
         DISPLAY "Negative"  
     END IF  
     IF number = 0 THEN  
         DISPLAY "Zero"  
     END IF  
END  
 
Problem 2: Simple Product Calculation   
Problem Description: Calculate the product of 5 numbers provided by the user.  
START  
     DECLARE product AS INTEGER = 1  
     DECLARE count AS INTEGER = 0  
     WHILE count < 5 DO  
         DISPLAY "Enter a number:"  
         READ num  
         product = product * num  
         count = count + 1  
         DISPLAY "Current product is: ", product   
     END WHILE  
     DISPLAY "Final Product is: ", product  
END  
 
 
 
62  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
Activity 4: Story to Logic Challenge  
 
Instructions: Your group will receive a "story problem" that describes a scenario needing a logical solution. 
Work collaboratively to design a robust algorithm for this problem.  
 
Materials: Lab Handout, large paper/whiteboard, markers, computer with flowcharting software.  
 
Procedure:  
 
•   Understand the Story .   Read your assigned story problem multiple times. What is the main goal? 
What information do you need (inputs)? What results should be produced (outputs)? What are the 
conditions or repeated actions?  
•   Brainstorm & Outline .   On paper or whiteboard, brainstorm the key steps. Don't worry about perfect 
syntax yet, just get the logic down.  
•   Develop Pseudocode .   Translate your outlined steps into detailed pseudocode, using appropriate 
constructs (IF/ELSE, WHILE/FOR, etc.).  
•   Create  Flowchart .   Using   the flowcharting software, draw the complete flowchart that visually 
represents your pseudocode.  
 
Story Problem  Set  for Lab Activity 4:  
 
Story Problem 1: The Coffee Shop Order System  
"A small coffee shop wants to automate its ordering process. A customer can order either a small (P100), 
medium (P120), or large (P140) coffee. They can also add milk (+P20) or sugar (+P10) to their order, or both. 
After an order is placed, the system shou ld ask if the customer wants to add another item (e.g., a pastry at 
P50). This should repeat until the customer says 'no'. Finally, the system should display the total cost of 
their order."  
 
Story Problem 2: Library Book Fine Calculator  
"The local library charges fines for overdue books. For the first 5 days overdue, the fine is P10 per day. For 
days 6 to 10 overdue, the fine is P20 per day. For any days beyond 10, the fine is P50 per day. If a book is 
returned within 24 hours of its due  date, there is no fine. Design a system that takes the number of days a 
book is overdue and calculates the total fine."  
 
Story Problem 3: Basic ATM Withdrawal  
"An ATM allows a user to withdraw money. The user first inputs their desired withdrawal amount. The ATM 
needs to check two things: 1) Is the amount a multiple of P100 (since it only dispenses P100 bills)? 2) Does 
the user have sufficient balance in their a ccount (assume a fixed balance of P5000 for this exercise)? If both 
conditions are met, the ATM dispenses the cash and displays 'Transaction Approved. Remaining Balance: 
[new balance]'. Otherwise, it displays an appropriate error message ('Invalid amount'  or 'Insufficient 
Balance')."  
 
 
 
63  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Outcomes - Based  Output 1. Self - Check  
Assessment    
1.   An algorithm is best described as:  
a) A type of computer program  
b) A set of ambiguous instructions to solve a problem  
c) A finite set of well - defined, unambiguous instructions to solve a problem or 
accomplish a task  
d) A graphical representation of program logic  
2.   Pseudocode is:  
a) A programming language like Python or Java  
b) An informal, high - level description of an algorithm, typically in English - like 
syntax  
c) A diagram using standard symbols to show program flow  
d) The final compiled version of a program  
3.   A flowchart is primarily used for:  
a) Writing actual programming code  
b) Graphically representing the step - by - step logic of an algorithm  
c) Executing instructions on a computer  
d) Debugging syntax errors in a program  
4.   True or False: A good algorithm must terminate after a finite number of steps.  
a) True  
b) False  
5.   Which characteristic of an algorithm ensures that each step is clear and precise, 
leaving no room for misinterpretation?  
a) Finite  
b) Input  
c) Output  
d) Well - defined/Unambiguous  
6.   True or False: An algorithm can only have one output.  
a) True  
b) False  
7.   The initial phase of problem - solving and planning before writing code involves 
which of the following?  
a) Debugging and testing  
b) Algorithms, pseudocode, and flowcharts  
c) Compiling and linking  
d) Deployment and maintenance  
 
Part 2: Flowchart Symbols (Matching / Identification)  
 
Match the flowchart symbol on the left with its correct name/function on the right.  
 
Symbol   Name/Function  
8.   Oval   A.   Process  
9.   Parallelogram   B.   Start/End/Terminator  
64  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
10.   Rectangle   C.   Decision  
11.   Diamond   D.   Input/Output  
12.   Arrow   E.   On - page connector  
13.   Small Circle   F.   Flowline  
 
Part 3: Short Answer / Application  
 
14.   Consider  the  following  simple  process:  " Convert  Philippine  Peso  to  Dollar”.  
Write a basic algorithm (step - by - step instructions).  
15.   What is the main advantage of using pseudocode before writing actual code?  
 
Output 2.  Board Recitation  
 
Objective :  To  provide  a  dynamic  and  interactive  environment  for  students  to 
demonstrate their ability to construct algorithms using pseudocode, translate logic 
into flowcharts, and critically evaluate logical designs in real - time.  
 
Instruction:  
•   You will be given a problem description.  
•   Clearly write the pseudocode on the board, including START/END, variable 
declarations (if appropriate), input/output statements, and any necessary 
control structures (IF/ELSE, loops).  
•   Translate  pseudocode  into  flowcharts  by  drawing  the  corresponding 
standard  symbols  (Terminator,  Process,  Input/Output,  Decision,  Flow 
Lines, Connectors).  
•   Ensure the flow lines accurately represent the sequence of operations and 
decisions.  
 
•   Be prepared to explain the pseudocode and the meaning of each symbol 
you used on your flowchart.  
 
Sample Problems:  
 
Problem   1 : Calculate Body Mass Index (BMI)  
Write pseudocode that takes a person's weight in kilograms and height in meters 
as input. It should then calculate their BMI using the formula: BMI = weight / (height 
* height). Finally, display the calculated BMI.  
 
Problem 2 : Number Sign and Parity  
Write pseudocode that takes an integer as input. It should first determine if the 
number is positive, negative, or zero. Then, if the number is not zero, it should also 
determine and display if it's "Even" or "Odd".  
 
Problem   3 : Eligibility for Discount  
65  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
A  store  offers  a  15%  discount  if  a  customer's  total  purchase  is  over  P500. 
Additionally,  if  the  customer  is  a  senior  citizen  (input  'Y'  or  'N'),  they  get  an 
additional 5% discount (total 20%) regardless of the total. Write pseudocode to 
calculate the final   amount a customer has to pay.  
 
Problem   4 : Traffic Light Status  
Write pseudocode that takes a single character input ('R' for Red, 'Y' for Yellow, 'G' 
for Green). Based on the input, it should display a message: "STOP", "PREPARE TO 
STOP", or "GO". If an invalid character is entered, display "Invalid Input".  
 
Problem   5 : Sum of Numbers in a Range  
Write pseudocode that takes two integers as input: start_num and end_num. It 
should  then  calculate  and  display  the  sum  of  all  integers  from  start_num  to 
end_num  (inclusive).  Assume  start_num  will  always  be  less  than  or  equal  to 
end_num.  
 
Problem   6 : Password Validation with Retries  
Write pseudocode that repeatedly prompts the user to "Enter password:" until the 
correct password "secret123" is entered. If the user makes 3 incorrect attempts, 
the program should display "Account Locked!" and terminate. Otherwise, display 
"Access Granted !".  
 
Problem   7 : Average of N Student Scores  
Write pseudocode that first asks the user "How many students?". Then, it should 
use a loop to prompt the user to enter the score for each student. After all scores 
are entered, it should calculate and display the average score.  
 
Output 3.  30 items  Quiz 2   on  Problem Solving and Software Development, and 
Introduction to Flowcharting and Programming  
Objective:  A  summative  assessment  to  comprehensively  evaluate  students' 
understanding and application of problem - solving techniques, algorithm design, 
and  flowcharting,  connecting  to  the  broader  Software  Development  Life  Cycle 
(SDLC) context .  
 
Output   4.  Applied Flowcharting and Problem - Solving  
 
Student Deliverables  
Component   Description  
1.   Problem - Solving  Tackle complex problems by designing clear, step - by -
Blueprint Challenge   step solution roadmaps and outlining your thought 
process.  
2.   Flowchart  Evaluation  Analyze and fix errors in flowcharts, ensuring they 
and Debugging   accurately represent processes and lead to correct 
outcomes.  
66  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
3.   Algorithm  Refine and enhance existing algorithms for improved 
Optimization  efficiency, reduced resource consumption, and better 
Challenge   performance.  
4.   Story   to   Logic  Translate  everyday  stories  into  structured  logical 
Problems   puzzles by identifying variables, relationships, and 
constraints  
 
Rubrics for Activity1 - 3  
 
Criteria   Exemplary (4 points)   Proficient (3 points)   Developing (2 points)   Beginning (1 point)  
Logical  Plan  Pseudocode   and  Pseudocode   and  Pseudocode    or  Pseudocode    or 
Correctness &  flowchart    are  flowchart    are  flowchart  has  minor  flowchart  contains 
Completeness  flawlessly   logical,  logically sound, solve  logical errors, misses  significant   logical 
(Pseudocode  completely solve the  the     problem  some edge cases, or  errors,  fails  to  solve 
& Flowchart)   problem, and handle  correctly, and handle  doesn't fully solve the  the  problem,  or  is 
all  specified  edge  most specified edge  problem. One or both  largely  incomplete. 
cases  or  conditions.  cases.  Both  formats  formats  may  be  Major inconsistencies 
Both  formats  are  are mostly complete  incomplete  or  have  between   formats 
comprehensive  and  and well - aligned.   inconsistencies.   exist.  
perfectly aligned.  
Adherence to  Solutions    are  Solutions    are  Solutions have some  Solutions are unclear, 
Conventions  exceptionally  clear,  generally    clear,  ambiguities    or  ambiguous,   and 
& Clarity   unambiguous,  and  unambiguous,  and  inconsistencies   in  demonstrate 
strictly adhere to all  mostly  adhere  to  clarity or convention  significant  deviations 
standard  standard  adherence,  making  from    standard 
pseudocode   and  conventions.  them   occasionally  conventions,  making 
flowcharting  Relatively  easy  to  difficult to follow.   them very difficult to 
conventions  follow  and  understand.  
(symbols, formatting,  understand.  
etc.). Easy to follow 
and understand.  
Problem  Demonstrates   a  Demonstrates a good  Demonstrates   a  Provides  little  to  no 
Analysis   &  comprehensive  and  analysis,  identifying  limited   analysis,  meaningful  analysis, 
Critique  insightful analysis of  most     errors,  identifying   some  failing  to  identify 
(Activities 2 &  given  problems  or  inefficiencies,   or  errors/inefficiencies  major  issues  or 
3)   solutions,  precisely  areas  for  but missing others or  opportunities   for 
identifying all errors,  improvement.   providing  superficial  improvement.  
inefficiencies,   or  observations.  
areas  for 
improvement.  
Proposed  Proposes  perfectly  Proposes logical and  Proposes    some  Proposes  few  to  no 
Solutions  &  logical, effective, and  effective  corrections/solutions,  corrections/solutions, 
Optimization  optimized  corrections/solutions  but  they  may  be  or they are incorrect, 
(Activities 2 &  corrections/solutions  for  most  identified  incomplete,  illogical,  ineffective,  or  make 
3)   for  all  identified  issues,     with  or lack clear rationale.  the  problem  worse. 
issues, with clear and  reasonable rationale.  Optimization may be  Lacks  understanding 
compelling rationale.  Shows     clear  minimal or introduce  of optimization.  
Demonstrates  improvement   in  new minor flaws.  
significant  efficiency  or  clarity 
improvement   in  over the original.  
efficiency or clarity.  
   
Rubric for Activity 4  
Criteria   Exemplary    (4  Proficient (3 points)   Developing    (2  Beginning (1 point)  
points)   points)  
Understanding  the  Demonstrates   a  Demonstrates   a  Demonstrates   a  Demonstrates   a 
Story  &  deep and complete  good understanding  partial  limited 
Requirements   understanding  of  of   the   story  understanding,  understanding, 
the story problem,  problem,  missing  some  key  failing  to  identify 
67  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
accurately  identifying   most  inputs,   outputs,  major  components 
identifying    all  inputs,   outputs,  conditions,    or  of   the   story 
inputs,   outputs,  conditions,   and  constraints.   problem.  
conditions,   and  constraints.  
constraints.  
Algorithm  Design  Designed algorithm  Designed algorithm  Designed algorithm  Designed algorithm 
(Pseudocode)   (pseudocode)   is  (pseudocode)   is  (pseudocode)  has  (pseudocode) 
robust,  handles  all  generally  robust,  minor logical flaws  contains  significant 
scenarios and edge  handles    most  or missed scenarios,  logical  errors,  fails 
cases,  is  highly  scenarios,    is  some inefficiencies,  to  address  the 
efficient,    and  efficient, and clear.   or  is  occasionally  problem, or is highly 
exceptionally clear.   unclear.   inefficient/unclear.  
Flowchart  Flowchart  is  a  Flowchart is a good  Flowchart   has  Flowchart    is 
Representation   perfect    visual  visual  minor  inconsistent  with 
representation  of  representation  of  inconsistencies with  the  pseudocode, 
the  pseudocode,  the  pseudocode,  the  pseudocode,  poorly organized, or 
highly  organized,  well - organized, and  some organizational  demonstrates 
and strictly adheres  mostly  adheres  to  issues, or occasional  major  convention 
to    standard  standard  deviations   from  violations.  
conventions.   conventions.   conventions.  
Collaboration   &  Group  effectively  Group collaborated  Group collaboration  Group collaboration 
Teamwork   collaborated,  well,  with  good  was  limited,  with  was  poor,  with 
demonstrating  division of labor and  some    uneven  significant issues in 
excellent division of  mutual   support,  participation   or  participation, 
labor,    mutual  leading to effective  minor difficulties in  division of labor, or 
support,    and  problem - solving.   reaching consensus.   problem - solving.  
cohesive  problem -
solving.    
 
References/Resources:  
 
Ahmad, M. S. (2024). Fundamentals of programming. Toronto Academic Press. 
https://www.perlego.com/book/4501018  
 
Chaudhuri, A. (2020). Flowchart and algorithm basics [Edition unavailable]. Mercury Learning and 
Information. https://www.perlego.com/book/3026682  
 
McAllister, W., & Fritz, S. J. (2021). Programming fundamentals using JAVA (2nd ed.). Mercury Learning and 
Information. https://www.perlego.com/book/3026716  
 
Other Suggested Readings:   
 
GeeksforGeeks. (n.d.). Algorithm and flowchart basics. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/algorithm - flowchart/  
 
Programiz. (2021). Pseudocode, algorithm, and flowchart. https://www.programiz.com/article/pseudocode -
algorithm - flowchart  
 
TutorialsPoint. (n.d.). Flowchart in programming. 
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/software_engineering/software_engineering_flowcharts.htm  
 
Guru99. (2021). Flowchart tutorial. https://www.guru99.com/flowchart.html  
 
 
68  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 