 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Module   in  
 
 
COMP102: COMPUTER 
 
 
PROGRAMMING 1    
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
MODULE 2:  
 
 
Topic:  Problem Solving and   
 
  Software Development  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
 
Week Number   2 - 3  
Chapter/Unit Number   2  
Topic Title   Problem Solving and Software Development  
Course Outcomes   CO2 Apply problem - solving techniques and the software development life cycle 
by analyzing and interpreting source code, flowcharts, and algorithms to design 
efficient programming solutions.  
Intended Learning  Lecture:  
Outcomes    
At the end of the chapter, the students will be able to:  
1.   Define  key  concepts  related  to  problem  solving  in  programming  and  the 
Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC).  
2.   Explain the steps involved in solving a programming problem from analysis to 
optimization.  
3.   Describe each phase of the SDLC and its role in software development.  
4.   Differentiate  between  various  SDLC  models  (e.g.,  Waterfall,  Agile,  Spiral,  V -
Model) and identify their appropriate applications.  
 
Laboratory:  
1.   Analyze a given programming problem to identify inputs, outputs, constraints, 
and processing logic.  
SDG and KLD REGAL100  SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth  
Integration   SDG 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure  
SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities  
REGAL 100:  Responsible Digital Citizens: Technology, Research Ethics, and Online 
Etiquette  
Discussion  
 
II.  Problem Solving and Software Development  
 
Programming is fundamentally about solving problems. Whether you are developing a simple calculator or a 
complex enterprise application, the ability to break down problems and systematically design solutions is 
crucial. This chapter introduces two key conc epts:  
 
Solving a Programming Problem  –   The step - by - step approach to analyzing, designing, and implementing a 
solution.  
 
The Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC)  –   A structured process for developing reliable and maintainable 
software.  
 
By the end of this chapter, you will understand how to approach programming problems methodically and 
how software development follows a disciplined lifecycle  
 
 
30  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
1.   Solving a Programming Problem  
 
Software development begins with the fundamental task of problem solving. At its core, programming is not 
simply  the  act  of  writing  code,  but  the  process  of  designing  solutions  to  specific  problems  that  can  be 
translated into a computer - executable form. Th e effectiveness of a program often depends more on how well 
the problem was understood and how systematically the solution was planned than on any programming 
language  or  technology  used.   Therefore,  cultivating  strong  problem - solving  skills  is  paramount  fo r  any 
aspiring programmer.  
 
Think of a programming problem as a puzzle. Before you start randomly moving pieces, you first need to 
understand what the puzzle looks like, what its constraints are, and what the desired outcome is. Similarly, 
in programming, rushing to write code withou t a clear understanding of the problem often leads to inefficient, 
buggy, or even completely incorrect solutions.  
 
Here's a systematic approach to solving a programming problem:  
 
a.   Understand the Problem  
 
Before attempting to solve any programming problem, the developer must have a clear understanding 
of  what  the  problem  is  asking.  This  step  involves  careful  reading  and  interpretation  of  the  problem 
statement, identification of the inputs and expected outpu ts, and recognition of any constraints or special 
conditions. Key questions to address include:  
 
•   What is the precise objective of the program?  
•   What inputs will the program receive (e.g., data types, formats, ranges)?  
•   What outputs are expected from the program (e.g., calculated values, formatted reports, specific 
displays)?  
•   What are the constraints or conditions that apply to the inputs or outputs (e.g., positive numbers 
only, specific data formats, performance requirements)?  
•   Are there any edge cases or exceptional scenarios that the program must handle gracefully (e.g., 
zero input, empty input, maximum/minimum values)?  
 
Example: Imagine you need to write a program that calculates the average of a list of numbers.  
 
Goal : Calculate the arithmetic mean.  
Inputs:   A list of numbers (e.g., integers, floating - point).  
Outputs:   A single number representing the average.  
Constraints/Edge Cases:   What if the list is empty? What if it contains non - numeric values? How should 
the average be rounded  
 
b.   Plan the Solution/   Algorithm   Design  
 
Once you have a crystal - clear understanding of the problem, it's time to devise a strategy. This stage 
involves breaking down the problem into smaller, manageable sub - problems and outlining the logical 
steps required to solve them.  
31  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
•   Break Down the Problem (Decomposition).   Large problems can be overwhelming. Decompose 
them into smaller, independent parts. This makes the problem less intimidating and easier to 
manage. For example, if you're building a system to manage student grades, sub - problems might 
include "inputting gra des," "calculating averages," "generating reports," and "storing data."  
•   Choose  an  Approach/Algorithm .   An  algorithm   is  a  step - by - step  procedure  for  solving  a 
problem. Consider different ways to achieve the desired outcome. For simple problems, this might 
be straightforward. For complex ones, you might need to research existing algorithms or invent 
your own.  
•   Pseudocode .   Write down the steps of your algorithm in a plain, human - readable language, similar 
to English, but structured like code. Pseudocode helps you focus on the logic without getting 
bogged down in specific programming language syntax.  
 
Example (Average of three numbers):  
 
START  
     GET number1  
     GET number2  
     GET number3  
     CALCULATE sum = number1 + number2 + number3  
     CALCULATE average = sum / 3  
     DISPLAY average  
END  
 
Flowcharts .  A flowchart is a visual representation of your algorithm, using standard symbols to 
depict different types of operations (e.g., input/output, processing, decision points). Flowcharts 
are excellent for visualizing the flow of control in your program.  
 
Data Structures .   Consider how you will store and organize the data your program will process. 
Will you need a simple variable, a list, an array, or something more complex?  
 
 
c.   Develop the Solution (Coding)  
 
This phase involves translating the meticulously devised plan (pseudocode, flowchart) into actual code 
using a chosen programming language. Adherence to the plan at this stage minimizes logical errors and 
improves coding efficiency. Best practices during i mplementation include:  
 
•   Choose a Programming Language .  Select a language appropriate for the task and your skill level.  
•   Write Clean, Readable Code:  
o   Comments.     Add comments to explain complex logic or non - obvious parts of your code.  
o   Meaningful Variable Names .   Use descriptive names (e.g., studentName instead of x).  
o   Indentation.   Use consistent indentation to show the structure of your code.  
o   Modularity.   Break down your code into functions or methods, each responsible for a 
specific task. This improves readability, reusability, and maintainability.  
32  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
•   Iterative Development .   Don't try to write the entire program at once. Start with a small, functional 
piece, test it, and then gradually add more functionality.  
 
d.   Testing and Debugging  
 
A fter implementation, the program must be rigorously tested to verify its correctness and identify defects 
(bugs). Testing ensures that the program behaves as expected under various conditions. Common types 
of errors encountered include:  
•   Syntax Errors .  Violations of the programming language's grammar rules, typically detected by 
the compiler or interpreter.  
•   Runtime  Errors.   Errors  that  occur  during  program  execution  (e.g.,  division  by  zero,  out - of -
memory errors).  
•   Logical Errors.  The most challenging errors to diagnose, where the program executes without 
crashing but produces incorrect results due to flawed logic in the algorithm.  
 
Effective testing involves creating a suite of test cases, including typical inputs, edge cases, invalid inputs, 
and boundary conditions, to thoroughly validate the program's behavior. Debugging tools and techniques 
(e.g., breakpoints, print statements) ar e invaluable in identifying the root cause of errors.  
 
Once the code is written, it's essential to thoroughly test it to ensure it works correctly and meets all 
requirements.  
 
Test Cases.   Create a set of input values and their expected outputs. These are your "test cases." Include 
normal cases, boundary cases (e.g., minimum/maximum values, empty inputs), and error cases.  
 
Unit Testing .   Test individual components or functions of your program in isolation.  
 
Integration Testing.   Test how different components of your program work together.  
 
System Testing.   Test the entire program as a complete system.  
 
Acceptance Testing.     Verifying that the system meets user requirements.  
 
Debugging.   The  process  of  finding  and  fixing  errors  (bugs)  in  your  code.  This  often  involves  using 
debugging tools, print statements, and systematically tracing the execution of your program.  
 
e.   Refining and Optimizing  
 
The problem - solving process doesn't end with a working program.  
 
Documentation.   Creating clear and comprehensive documentation is vital for future understanding, 
modification, and collaboration. This includes:  
 
•   Internal Documentation.   Comments within the code explaining logic and functionality.  
33  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
•   External Documentation .   User manuals, API documentation, design documents, and technical 
specifications.  
 
Maintenance .   Programs often require ongoing maintenance, which can involve:  
 
•   Bug Fixes .   Addressing newly discovered errors.  
•   Enhancements .   Adding new features or improving existing ones.  
•   Performance Optimization .   Improving the efficiency of the program.  
•   Adaptation: Modifying the program to work in new environments or with new technologies.  
 
2.   The Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC)  
 
While  the  previous  section  focused  on  solving  a  single  programming  problem,  real - world  software 
development often involves larger, more complex projects that require a systematic and organized approach. 
This is where the Software Development Life Cycle (SD LC) comes into play.  
 
The  SDLC  is  a  conceptual  framework  that  describes  the  stages  involved  in  an  information  system 
development project, from initial feasibility study through maintenance. It provides a roadmap for managing 
software projects, ensuring quality, efficiency, and  adherence to requirements. Different SDLC models exist, 
but  they  generally  share  common  phases.  While  specific  SDLC  models  may  vary,  most  encompass  the 
following core phases:  
 
Requirements  Gathering  and  Analysis .   This  foundational  phase  involves  eliciting,  documenting,  and 
analyzing the functional and non - functional requirements of the software system. It necessitates extensive 
communication  with  stakeholders  (e.g.,  end - users,  clients,  business  analysts)  to  unders tand  their  needs, 
objectives, and constraints. The primary output of this phase is typically a System Requirements Specification 
(SRS) document, detailing what the system must do.  
 
Design .   In the design phase, the requirements are translated into a detailed plan for how the software will 
be built. This involves various levels of design:  
 
•   High - Level Design (Architectural Design).   Defines the overall structure of the system, including its 
major components, their interactions, and the chosen architectural patterns.  
•   Low - Level  Design  (Detailed  Design).   Focuses  on  the  internal  logic  of  individual  components, 
including data structures, algorithms, interface specifications, and module - level design.  
•   User Interface (UI) / User Experience (UX) Design .  Designing the look and feel of the software, 
focusing on usability and user satisfaction.  
•   Database  Design.     If  applicable,  designing  the  database  schema,  tables,  relationships,  and  data 
integrity constraints.  
 
Implementation (Coding).   This phase involves the actual writing of code based on the design specifications. 
Developers  translate  the  detailed  design  into  executable  program  code  using  selected  programming 
languages and tools. Emphasis is placed on producing clean, modular, and ma intainable code, often following 
established coding standards.  
 
34  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Testing.   Following implementation, the software undergoes rigorous testing to identify and rectify defects, 
ensuring  that  it  meets  the  specified  requirements  and  performs  reliably.  Various  levels  of  testing  are 
conducted:  
 
•   Unit Testing - Verifying individual components or modules in isolation.  
•   Integration Testing -   Testing the interactions between integrated modules.  
•   System  Testing -   Validating  the  complete  system  against  the  functional  and  non - functional 
requirements.  
•   Acceptance Testing - User - driven testing to confirm that the system meets business needs and is ready 
for deployment.  
 
Deployment .   This phase involves making the developed software available for use by end - users. It includes 
activities such as installation, configuration, data migration, user training, and creation of user manuals. The 
complexity of deployment can range from a simple   application installation to the launch of a large - scale 
enterprise system.  
 
Maintenance .   The final and often longest phase of the SDLC, maintenance involves ongoing support for the 
software after its deployment. It encompasses several types of activities:  
 
•   Corrective Maintenance .   Addressing bugs or defects discovered after deployment.  
•   Adaptive Maintenance .     Modifying the software to adapt to changes in its environment (e.g., new 
operating systems, hardware upgrades).  
•   Perfective Maintenance .   Enhancing existing functionalities, improving performance, or optimizing 
code based on user feedback or evolving requirements.  
•   Preventive  Maintenance .   Proactive  measures  taken  to  prevent  future  problems  or  improve 
software maintainability.  
 
SDLC Models  
 
While the phases remain largely consistent, different SDLC models arrange and emphasize these phases in 
various ways.  
 
Waterfall  Model.   A  sequential,  linear  approach  where  each  phase  must  be  completed  before  the  next 
begins. Simple and easy to manage, but inflexible to changes. Best suited for projects with well - defined, stable 
requirements.  
 
Agile  Model.   An  iterative  and  incremental  approach  that  emphasizes  flexibility,  collaboration,  and  rapid 
delivery of working software in short cycles (sprints). Highly adaptable to changing requirements, but requires 
strong communication and self - organizing teams.  
 
Spiral Model.   Combines elements of the waterfall model with iterative prototyping, with a strong emphasis 
on risk analysis at each iteration. Suitable for large, complex, and high - risk projects.  
 
V - Model.     An extension of the Waterfall model, emphasizing the relationship between development phases 
and testing phases. Each development phase has a corresponding testing phase.  
35  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
Laboratory  Exercises  
 
Understanding the Problem: The First Step in Problem Solving  
 
Activity 1.  Problem Analysis and Decomposition  
 
Objective  
•   To reinforce the "Understand the Problem" phase of problem - solving.  
 
Materials  
•   Handouts  with  programming problem statements   
 
Procedure  
•   Briefly  recap  the  importance  of  understanding  the  problem,  identifying  inputs/outputs,  and 
constraints. Show a simple example of a problem statement analysis.  
•   Students will be given  a   programming problem statements.  They  must:  
o   Clearly state the Objective of the program.  
o   Identify all potential Inputs (data types, expected format, range if applicable).  
o   Identify all expected Outputs (data types, expected format).  
o   List any Constraints or special conditions (e.g., "input must be positive," "output rounded to 
two decimal places").  
o   Brainstorm potential Edge Cases or exceptional scenarios.  
 
Scenario:  
 
1.   Your task is to thoroughly analyze the problem of creating a "Student Grade Calculator." This calculator 
should be able to process multiple grades for a student, calculate their average, and determine their final 
grade based on a given grading scale.  
 
Instructions:  
•   Clearly define the problem by identifying the core functionality, inputs, outputs, and any specific 
constraints or assumptions.  
•   A concise written statement (approx. 100 - 150 words) that addresses:  
o   What  data will  the  calculator  need  to take  as  input  (e.g.,  number  of  grades,  individual  grade 
values)?  
o   What calculations need to be performed (e.g., sum, average)?  
o   What is the expected output (e.g., numerical average, letter grade)?  
o   Are there any assumptions about the input (e.g., grades are integers/decimals, grade range 0 -
100)?  
o   Are there any specific constraints (e.g., minimum/maximum number of grades, specific grading 
scale)?  
 
 
 
36  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
 
Example Constraint/Assumption to consider: Assume the grading scale is:  
 
FINAL SCORE   FINAL GRADE       FINAL SCORE   FINAL GRADE  
97 - 100     1.00         82 - 84     2.25    
94 - 96     1.25         79 - 81     2.50  
91 - 93     1.50         76 - 78     2.75  
88 - 90     1.75         70 - 75     3.00  
85 - 87     2.00         <70     5.00  
 
2.   Algorithm Design   
 
Design a step - by - step algorithm to solve the Student Grade Calculator problem. Your algorithm should be 
detailed enough that another programmer could implement it without further clarification.   
 
Deliverable:  
 
A well - structured algorithm that includes steps for:  
•   Getting inputs (e.g., number of grades, individual grades).  
•   Validating inputs (optional but good practice).  
•   Calculating the sum of grades.  
•   Calculating the average.  
•   Determining the letter grade based on the provided scale.  
•   Displaying the results.  
 
3 .  Test Case Development  
 
Develop a comprehensive set of test cases to validate your algorithm. Each test case should include specific 
inputs and their corresponding expected outputs. Aim for a variety of cases, including typical, edge, and 
potentially invalid inputs.  
 
Deliverabl e  
•   A table with at least  3   distinct test cases, including:  
o   Test Case ID   -   (e.g., TC001, TC002)  
o   Description   -   A brief explanation of what this test case is designed to test (e.g., "Typical case, 
all A grades," "Edge case: single grade," "Invalid input: negative grade").  
o   Input Data -   Specific numerical grades or scenarios (e.g., [95, 92, 98], [75], [50, 45, 55], [105], 
[ - 10]).  
o   Expected Output - The precise average and letter grade that should result from the given input 
data according to your algorithm and the specified grading scale.  
 
 
 
 
 
37  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
Outcomes - Based  Output 1.   Self - Check  
Assessment    
1.   The  ability  to  break  down  problems  and  systematically  design  solutions  is 
known as:  
a) Debugging  
b) Problem Solving  
c) Coding  
d) Optimization  
 
2.   Which type of error occurs when the program runs but produces incorrect 
results due to a flaw in its logic?  
a) Syntax Error  
b) Runtime Error  
c) Logical Error  
d) Compilation Error  
 
3.   Which phase of the SDLC involves eliciting and analyzing stakeholder needs?  
a) Design  
b) Implementation  
c) Requirements Gathering and Analysis  
d) Testing  
 
4.   Which SDLC model strongly emphasizes risk analysis at each iteration?  
a) Waterfall  
b) Agile  
c) Spiral  
d) V - Model  
 
5.   A  step - by - step  procedure  for  solving  a  problem,  expressed  in  a  human -
readable format, is called:  
a) Syntax  
b) Pseudocode  
c) Flowchart  
d) Algorithm  
 
6.   Visual representations of algorithms using standard symbols are known as:  
a) Pseudocode  
b) Data Structures  
c) Flowcharts  
d) Debugging Tools  
 
7.   Which of the following best defines pseudocode?  
a)   A graphical representation of an algorithm  
b)   Executable code written in a specific programming language  
c)   An informal, human - readable description of the logic of a program  
38  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
d)   A data structure used in problem solving  
 
8.   Which of the following best describes the purpose of the design phase in SDLC?  
a)   Writing executable code  
b)   Determining project costs  
c)   Creating system architecture and plans  
d)   Installing the software  
 
9.   What is the main goal of the requirement analysis phase?  
a)   Deploy the software to users  
b)   Fix bugs and improve performance  
c)   Understand user needs and system requirements  
d)   Draw flowcharts and UML diagrams  
 
10.   True or False.  Flowcharts are used to test whether the code runs correctly.  
11.   What is the role of pseudocode in the problem - solving process, and why is it 
used instead of writing code immediately?  
12.   List the 5 basic steps of solving a programming problem in the correct order.  
13.   Briefly explain why testing is essential in software development.  
14.   Scenario .  A programmer is given the task of creating a grade calculator. They 
start by identifying the user inputs (scores) and expected output (final grade), 
then  write  pseudocode  before  implementing  the  logic  in  a  programming 
language.   Which steps of the problem - solving process are shown here, and 
why are they important before coding?  
15.   A software project launched with errors that could have been identified with 
better testing. Stakeholders were not fully consulted in the planning phase, 
leading  to  unmet  user  expectations.   What  SDLC  phases  were  weak  or 
skipped, and how did that affect the outcome?  
 
Output 2.  Problem Analysis and Decomposition  
 
Given a programming problem (a Student Grade Calculator), students will:  
1.   Clearly define the problem requirements and constraints.  
2.   Design a detailed algorithm   to solve the problem .  
3.   Develop a set of test cases with expected outputs to validate their algorithm 
(and later code).  
 
Student Deliverables  
Component   Description  
1. Problem Definition   Write a clear, concise description of the problem, 
inputs, outputs, and constraints.  
2. Algorithm Design   Submit a detailed  strategy or algorithm   to   logically 
solves the problem.  
39  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
4. Testing Plan   Create at least 3 test cases showing inputs, expected 
outputs, and explanation of how tests validate the 
solution.  
 
Rubrics  
Criteria   Exemplary (4 points)   Proficient    (3  Developing   (2  Beginning (1 point)  
points)   points)  
Problem  Demonstrates  Demonstrates  Demonstrates  Demonstrates 
Analysis   &  exceptional  strong  partial  minimal 
Decomposition   understanding  of  the  understanding  of  understanding  of  understanding  of 
problem:  Clearly  and  the   problem:  the   problem:  the problem: Fails 
concisely states the core  Clearly  states  the  Attempts  to  state  to clearly state the 
objective,   accurately  objective,  the  objective  but  objective    or 
identifies  all  potential  identifies   most  lacks    clarity.  misunderstands 
inputs  (data  types,  inputs,  outputs,  Identifies   some  the   problem's 
formats,  ranges),  all  and   constraints  inputs, outputs, or  purpose.  Fails  to 
expected  outputs  (data  with  appropriate  constraints   but  identify   most 
types,  formats),  all  details,    and  misses key details.  inputs, outputs, or 
relevant constraints, and  brainstorms  Brainstorms  few  constraints 
brai nstorms  a  several  relevant  relevant   edge  accurately. Fails to 
comprehensive  set  of  edge  cases.  The  cases. The written  brainstorm 
insightful edge cases and  written  statement  statement    is  relevant   edge 
exceptional   scenarios.  addresses    all  somewhat  clear  cases. The written 
The written statement is  required   points  but   m ay   be  stateme nt    is 
concise,  well - structured,  clea rly.   incomplete.   largely incomplete 
and  fully  addresses  all  or inaccurate.  
required points.  
Algorithm  Designs an exceptionally  Designs a clear and  Designs     a  Designs     a 
Design   clear,  detailed,  and  detailed algorithm:  developing  beginning 
logically    structured  The  algorithm  is  algorithm:   The  algorithm:   The 
algorithm: The algorithm  clear  enough  for  algorithm    is  algorithm    is 
is so precise that another  implementation,  somewhat  clear  unclear, 
programmer    could  with  only  minor  but lacks sufficient  incomplete,   or 
implement it without any  areas  potentially  detail  or  contains  contains 
further  clarification.  It  needing  minimal  logical  gaps  that  significant  logical 
includes  all  necessary  clarification.   It  would   hinder  errors,   making 
steps for input handling,  includes   most  independent  implementation 
calculations    (sum,  necessary  steps  implementation. It  difficult    or 
a verage,  letter  grade  and  follows  a  misses   several  impossible. It fails 
determination),   and  logical  flow  with  necessary steps or  to  include  most 
result display, following a  minor  provides  necessary steps or 
highly logical and efficient  inefficiencies.   incomplete  ones.  provides  entirely 
flow.   The  logical  flow  incorrect ones. The 
may     have  logical  flow  is 
inco nsistencies.   il logical or chaotic.  
Test   Case  Develops  a  Develops a strong  Develops    a  Develops    a 
Development   comprehensive  set  of  set of accurate test  developing  set  of  beginning  set  of 
highly accurate test cases:  cases:  Includes  at  test cases: Includes  test cases: Fails to 
Includes at least 3 distinct  least 3 distinct test  fewer  than  3  develop  adequate 
test cases covering a wide  cases   covering  distinct test cases  test  cases  or 
variety  of  typical,  edge,  typical  and  some  or  lacks  sufficient  provides  largely 
and  invalid  inputs.  All  edge/invalid  variety  in  types.  irrelevant  ones. 
expected  outputs  are  inputs.    Most  Some   expected  Expected  outputs 
precisely  calculated  and  expected  outputs  outputs    are  are    mostly 
perfectly  align  with  the  are   accurately  inaccurately  inaccurate   or 
algorithm   and   the  calculated   and  calculated  or  do  missing. Test case 
p rovided  grading  scale.  align  with  the  not fully align with  descriptions  are 
Each test case has a clear,  algorithm   and  the  algorithm  or  missing     or 
concise,  and  insightful  grading scale. Each  grading scale. Test  unhelpful.  
description.   test  case  has  a  case  descriptions 
clear  description.   may   be vague.    
40  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 

 
References/Resources:  
 
Ahmad, M. S. (2024). Fundamentals of programming. Toronto Academic Press. 
https://www.perlego.com/book/4501018  
 
Dzvapatsva, G. (2023). NCV2 basic principles of computer programming and computer literacy. Future 
Managers. https://www.perlego.com/book/4167037  
 
Chaudhuri,  A.  (2020).  Flowchart  and  algorithm  basics  [Edition  unavailable].  Mercury  Learning  and 
Information. https://www.perlego.com/book/3026682  
 
Other Suggested Readings:   
TutorialsPoint. (n.d.). Software development life cycle (SDLC). 
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/sdlc/index.htm  
GeeksforGeeks. (n.d.). How to approach a coding problem. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/how - to -
approach - a - coding - problem/  
Programiz. (2021). Pseudocode, algorithm, and flowchart. https://www.programiz.com/article/pseudocode -
algorithm - flowchart  
Guru99. (2021). SDLC tutorial. https://www.guru99.com/software - development - life - cycle - tutorial.html  
 
   
41  
Course Module in  COMP102 :   
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING 1  
 