CCIS1102/L – COMPUTER PROGRAMMING1
WEEK 2 - FUNDAMENTALS OF COMPUTING AND
PROGRAMMING

LEARNING OBJECTIVES:

1. Define what a computer is and identify its main components.
2. Explain the basic operations that a computer can perform.
3. Examine the importance of programming in diverse contexts such as

software development, problem-solving, automation, and innovation.
4. Recognize real-world scenarios where programming is employed to
automate tasks, process data, and create software solutions.
5. Differentiate between high-level, low-level, and machine languages.
6. Define syntax, semantics, and grammar in the context of programming
languages.
2

What is Computer?
COMPUTER – A computer is an
electronic
data
processing
device, which accepts and stores
data input, processes the data
input, and generates the output
in a required format.

3

FUNCTIONALITIES OF A COMPUTER
If we look at it in a very broad sense, any digital computer
carries out the following five functions −
Step 1 − Takes data as input.
Step 2 − Stores the data/instructions in its memory and uses
them as required.
Step 3 − Processes the data and converts it into useful
information.
Step 4 − Generates the output.
Step 5 − Controls all the above four steps.
4

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Business - A computer has high speed of calculation, diligence, accuracy, reliability,
or versatility which has made it an integrated part in all business organizations.
Computer is used in business organizations for −
• Payroll calculations
• Budgeting
• Sales analysis
• Financial forecasting
• Managing employee database
• Maintenance of stocks, etc.

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Banking - Today, banking is almost totally dependent on computers.
Banks provide the following facilities −
• Online accounting facility, which includes checking current balance, making deposits
and overdrafts, checking interest charges, shares, and trustee records.
• ATM machines which are completely automated are making it even easier for
customers to deal with banks.

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Insurance -Insurance companies are keeping all records up-to-date with the help of
computers. Insurance companies, finance houses, and stock broking firms are widely
using computers for their concerns.
Insurance companies are maintaining a database of all clients with information showing −
• Starting date of the policies
• Next due installment of a policy
• Maturity date
• Interests due
• Survival benefits
• Bonus

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Education -The computer helps in providing a lot of facilities in the education system.
• The computer provides a tool in the education system known as CBE (Computer
Based Education).
• CBE involves control, delivery, and evaluation of learning.
• Computer education is rapidly increasing the graph of number of computer students.
• There are a number of methods in which educational institutions can use a computer
to educate the students.
• It is used to prepare a database about performance of a student and analysis is
carried out on this basis.

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Marketing - In marketing, uses of the computer are following −
• Advertising − With computers, advertising professionals create art
and graphics, write and revise copy, and print and disseminate ads
with the goal of selling more products.
• Home Shopping − Home shopping has been made possible
through the use of computerized catalogues that provide access to
product information and permit direct entry of orders to be filled by
the customers.

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Healthcare - Computers have become an important part in hospitals, labs, and dispensaries. They
are being used in hospitals to keep the record of patients and medicines. It is also used in scanning
and diagnosing different diseases. ECG, EEG, ultrasounds and CT scans, etc. are also done by
computerized machines.
Following are some major fields of health care in which computers are used.
• Diagnostic System − Computers are used to collect data and identify the cause of illness.
• Lab-diagnostic System − All tests can be done and the reports are prepared by computer.
• Patient Monitoring System − These are used to check the patient's signs for abnormality such as
in Cardiac Arrest, ECG, etc.
• Pharma Information System − Computer is used to check drug labels, expiry dates, harmful side
effects, etc.
• Surgery − Nowadays, computers are also used in performing surgery.

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Engineering Design -Computers are widely used for Engineering purpose.
One of the major areas is CAD (Computer Aided Design) that provides creation and
modification of images. Some of the fields are −
Structural Engineering − Requires stress and strain analysis for design of ships,
buildings, budgets, airplanes, etc.
Industrial Engineering − Computers deal with design, implementation, and
improvement of integrated systems of people, materials, and equipment.
Architectural Engineering − Computers help in planning towns, designing
buildings, determining a range of buildings on a site using both 2D and 3D drawings.

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Military -Computers are largely used in defense. Modern tanks, missiles,
weapons, etc. Military also employs computerized control systems. Some
military areas where a computer has been used are −
• Missile Control
• Military Communication
• Military Operation and Planning
• Smart Weapons

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Communication -Communication is a way to convey a message, an idea, a
picture, or speech that is received and understood clearly and correctly by
the person for whom it is meant. Some main areas in this category are −
E-mail

Chatting

Usenet

FTP

Telnet

Video-conferencing

APPLICATIONS OF COMPUTERS
Government -Computers play an important role in government services.
Some major fields in this category are −
• Budgets
• Sales tax department
• Income tax department
• Computation of male/female ratio
• Computerization of voters lists
• Weather forecasting

TYPES OF COMPUTERS
1

PC (Personal
Computer)

It is a single user computer system having moderately
powerful microprocessor

2

Workstation

It is also a single user computer system, similar to personal
computer however has a more powerful microprocessor.

Minicomputer

It is a multi-user computer system, capable of supporting
hundreds of users simultaneously.

4

Main Frame

It is a multi-user computer system, capable of supporting
hundreds of users simultaneously. Software technology is
different from minicomputer.

5

Supercomputer

3

It is an extremely fast computer, which can execute hundreds
of millions of instructions per second.

TYPES OF COMPUTERS

PC (Personal Computer)

Main Frame

Workstation

Minicomputer

Supercomputer

HARDWARE
Hardware represents the physical and tangible components of a computer,
i.e. the components that can be seen and touched.
Examples of Hardware are the following −
Input devices − keyboard, mouse, etc.
Output devices − printer, monitor, etc.
Secondary storage devices − Hard disk, CD, DVD, etc.
Internal components − CPU, motherboard, RAM, etc.

CENTRAL PROCESSING UNIT
Central Processing Unit (CPU) consists of the following
features −
• CPU is considered as the brain of the computer.
• CPU performs all types of data processing
operations.
• It stores data, intermediate results, and instructions
(program).
• It controls the operation of all parts of the computer.
CPU itself has following three components.
•Memory or Storage Unit
•Control Unit
•ALU(Arithmetic Logic Unit)

INPUT DEVICES
Following are some of the important input devices which are used in a computer −
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Keyboard
Mouse
Joy Stick
Light pen
Track Ball
Scanner
Graphic Tablet
Microphone
Magnetic Ink Card Reader(MICR)
Optical Character Reader(OCR)
Bar Code Reader
Optical Mark Reader(OMR)

OUTPUT DEVICES
Following are some of the important output devices used in a
computer.
Monitors
Graphic Plotter
Printer
Projector
Speaker

MEMORY
It is used to store data and instructions. Computer memory is the storage space in the computer,
where data is to be processed and instructions required for processing are stored. The memory is
divided into large number of small parts called cells. Each location or cell has a unique address,
which varies from zero to memory size minus one.
Memory is primarily of three types −
Cache Memory - It acts as a buffer between the CPU and the main memory. It is used to hold
those parts of data and program which are most frequently used by the CPU.
Primary Memory/Main Memory - Primary memory holds only those data and instructions on
which the computer is currently working. It has a limited capacity and data is lost when power is
switched off. It is divided into two subcategories RAM and ROM.
Secondary Memory - This type of memory is also known as external memory or non-volatile. It is
slower than the main memory. These are used for storing data/information permanently.

MOTHERBOARD
The motherboard serves as a single platform to connect all of the parts of a computer together. It
connects the CPU, memory, hard drives, optical drives, video card, sound card, and other ports
and expansion cards directly or via cables. It can be considered as the backbone of a computer.
A motherboard comes with following features −
• Motherboard varies greatly in supporting various types of components.
• Motherboard supports a single type of CPU and few types of memories.
• Video cards, hard disks, sound cards have to be compatible with the motherboard to function properly.
• Motherboards, cases, and power supplies must be compatible to work properly together.
Popular manufacturers of the motherboard.
Intel
ABIT

ASUS
Biostar

Aopen MSI
Gigabyte

MEMORY UNITS
Memory unit is the amount of data that can be stored in the storage unit. This storage capacity is
expressed in terms of Bytes.
S.No.
1
2
3

4

Unit & Description
Bit (Binary Digit)
A binary digit is logical 0 and 1 representing a passive or an active state of a component in an electric
circuit.
Nibble
A group of 4 bits is called nibble.
Byte
A group of 8 bits is called byte. A byte is the smallest unit, which can represent a data item or a character.
Word
A computer word, like a byte, is a group of fixed number of bits processed as a unit, which varies from
computer to computer but is fixed for each computer.
The length of a computer word is called word-size or word length. It may be as small as 8 bits or may be as
long as 96 bits. A computer stores the information in the form of computer words.

PORTS
A port is a physical docking point using which an external device can be
connected to the computer. It can also be programmatic docking point
through which information flows from a program to the computer or
over the Internet.
Characteristics of Ports
A port has the following characteristics −
External devices are connected to a computer using cables and ports.
Ports are slots on the motherboard into which a cable of external device
is plugged in.
Examples of external devices attached via ports are the mouse,
keyboard, monitor, microphone, speakers, etc.

SOFTWARE
Software is a set of programs, which is designed to perform
a well-defined function. A program is a sequence of
instructions written to solve a particular problem.
There are two types of software −
System Software - comprises the programs that you use to
manage your computer, including operating systems such
as Windows, Linux, or UNIX for larger computers and
Google Android and Apple iOS for smartphones
Application Software - comprises all the programs you
apply to a task — word-processing programs, spreadsheets,
payroll and inventory programs, and even games.

OPERATING SYSTEMS
The Operating System is a program with the following
features −
• An operating system is a program that acts as an
interface between the software and the computer
hardware.
• It is an integrated set of specialized programs used to
manage overall resources and operations of the
computer.
• It is a specialized software that controls and monitors
the execution of all other programs that reside in the
computer, including application programs and other
system software.

A LAYERED VIEW OF THE COMPUTER

PROGRAM AND PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES
Program – is a set of instruction that the computer follows.
Programming Language (PL) - is a standardized
communication technique for expressing instructions to a
computer. Example: Visual Basic, C++, C#, Java, Assembly
Language

SYNTAX, SEMANTICS AND GRAMMAR
Syntax- refers to the set of rules that define the correct structure of statements or
expressions in a programming language. It governs how symbols, keywords, and other
elements should be arranged to form valid and meaningful code.
Semantics - Semantics deals with the meaning or interpretation of code. It focuses on
whether the code, once executed, behaves as intended and produces the desired results.
Grammar - refers to the rules that define the structure and composition of valid
statements or expressions in a programming language. It encompasses both syntax and
semantics, providing a comprehensive set of rules for how code should be written and
how it should behave.

USES OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES
Programming languages are used for a wide range of applications across
many industries, including:
• Software Development: Programming languages are primarily used
for software development. Developers use programming languages to
write code for applications, systems software, and other computer
programs.
• Web Development: Programming languages like HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript are used for web development to create dynamic and
interactive websites.
• Data Science and Analytics: Programming languages like Python and
R are popular in data science and analytics to analyze and interpret
data, and to build machine learning models.

USES OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES
Programming languages are used for a wide range of applications across
many industries, including:
• Scientific Computing: Programming languages like Fortran and
MATLAB are used for scientific computing to solve complex
mathematical and scientific problems.
• Game Development: Programming languages like C++ and C# are used
for game development to create video games and other interactive
media.
• Mobile App Development: Programming languages like Java and Swift
are used for mobile app development to create apps for iOS and
Android platforms.

USES OF PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES
Programming languages are used for a wide range of applications across
many industries, including:
• Artificial Intelligence and Robotics: Programming languages like
Python and C++ are used in artificial intelligence and robotics to build
intelligent systems that can learn, reason, and interact with the physical
world.
• Embedded Systems: Programming languages like C and Assembly are
used for embedded systems development to create software for small,
low-power devices like microcontrollers and IoT devices.

CATEGORIES OF PL
Machine Language
• The representation of a computer program which is actually read and
understood by the computer.
• A program in machine code consists of a sequence of machine
instructions.
• Machine instructions are in binary code
• Instructions specify operations and memory cells involved in the
operation

CATEGORIES OF PL
Assembly Language
• A symbolic representation of the machine language of a specific processor.
• Is converted to machine code by an assembler.
• Usually, each line of assembly code produces one machine instruction (One-to-one
correspondence).
• Programming in assembly language is slow and error-prone but is more efficient
in terms of hardware performance.
• Mnemonic representation of the instructions and data

CATEGORIES OF PL
High Level Programming Language
• It is designed to be easier for humans to read, write, and
understand compared to low-level languages like assembly
or machine language. High-level languages are closer to
human languages and use more natural constructs, making
them more intuitive and user-friendly for programmers.
However, every single program written in a high-level
language must be interpreted into machine language
before being executed by the computer. High-level
languages require the use of a compiler or an interpreter
for their translation into the machine code. Ex: Python,
JavaScript, Visual Basic, Delphi, Perl, PHP, ECMAScript,
Ruby, C++,C#, Java

SOURCE PROGRAM
• The form in which a computer program, written in some formal
programming language, is written by the programmer.​
• Can be compiled automatically into object code or machine code or
executed by an interpreter. ​
• Pascal source programs have extension ‘.pas’​
• C++ source programs can have n extension of ‘.c’, ‘.h’, or ‘.cpp’​
• Java source programs have an extension of ‘.java’​

COMPILER
• A program that converts another program from some source language
(or high-level programming language) to machine language (object
code).​
• Some compilers output assembly language which is then converted to
machine language by a separate assembler. ​
• Is distinguished from an assembler by the fact that each input
statement, in general, correspond to more than one machine
instruction. ​

INTERPRETER
• An interpreter is a program that reads and executes code line by line,
translating the code into machine-readable instructions as it goes.
Interpreters are commonly used for scripting languages like Python and
Ruby, where the code is executed directly without being compiled first.
Interpreted code can be slower to run than compiled code, but it can be
more flexible and easier to debug.

CCIS1102/L – COMPUTER PROGRAMMING1
WEEK 2-3 - PROGRAM DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT

LEARNING OBJECTIVES:

1. Define what a computer is and identify its main components.
2. Explain the basic operations that a computer can perform.
3. Examine the importance of programming in diverse contexts such as

software development, problem-solving, automation, and innovation.
4. Recognize real-world scenarios where programming is employed to
automate tasks, process data, and create software solutions.
5. Differentiate between high-level, low-level, and machine languages.
6. Define syntax, semantics, and grammar in the context of programming
languages.
7. Identify the stages of the program development life cycle.
8. Apply analysis and design techniques to plan programs.
9. Utilize pseudocode and flowcharts to design program logic.
40

Programming Development Cycle
•

It is a model which is used to represent the stages and tasks
that are included orderly in each step to write and put
software.

•

It is a set of steps or phases that are used to develop a
program in any programming language.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Problem Definition
Problem Analysis
Algorithm Development
Coding & Documentation
Testing & Debugging
Maintenance

1. Problem Definition
•

In this phase, we define the problem statement and we decide the
boundaries of the problem. We need to understand the problem
statement, what is our requirement, what should be the output of
the problem solution. These are defined in this first phase of the
program development life cycle.

Example:
A Human Resources department that needs a printed list of
all employees, a Billing department that wants a list of
clients who are 30 or more days overdue on their payments,
and an Order department that needs a Web site to provide
buyers with an online shopping cart in which to gather their
orders. Because programmers are providing a service to
these users, programmers must first understand what the
users want.

2. Problem Analysis
•

In phase 2, we determine the requirements like variables, functions, etc. to solve
the problem. That means we gather the required resources to solve the problem
defined in the problem definition phase. We also determine the bounds of the
solution.

•

Note:
• Develop a list of problem variables & their relationships
• Identify the problem input variables
• Identify the desired output variables
• Identify local or temporary variables
• Determine type & units for the variables
• Determine how should the output be displayed
• Determine relevant formulas needed to transform input into output
• Identify any additional requirements or constraints

3. Algorithm Development
•

•
•
•

Also known as Design Phase. During this phase, we develop a step
by step procedure to solve the problem using the specification given
in the previous phase. This phase is very important for program
development. That means we write the solution in step by step
statements.
Develop a list of steps (Algorithm) to solve the problem, using
pseudocode, flowcharts, or IPO (Input/Process/Output chart)
charts
Test if the algorithm will solve the problem as intended by using
sample input and checking the output.
Top-Down design should be used.

Algorithm
An algorithm is the sequence of steps necessary to solve any
programming problem.
•

Qualities of a good algorithm
• Inputs and outputs should be defined precisely.
• Each steps in algorithm should be clear and unambiguous.
• Algorithm should be most effective among many different ways
to solve a problem.
• An algorithm shouldn't have computer code. Instead, the
algorithm should be written in such a way that, it can be used in
similar programming languages.

Algorithm
Problem Statement:
Write a solution on how to find the average grades of a class of 10
students
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Identify the grades of the 10 students.
Add all the grades.
Divide the total of the grades by 10.
Round off the answer by two decimal places.
Show the result.

Pseudocode
•
•
•

an English-like representation of the logical steps it takes to solve a
problem.
Describes steps of an algorithm in the “Design” phase
Not a programming language

Example

Initialize sum to 0
Repeat for N = 1 to 10
Read grade
Calculate sum = sum + grade
End Loop
Calculate average = sum/10
Print average

Pseudocode
Problem: Counting characters in a string
• Input from terminal a word (character
string)
• Output to terminal how many
characters it contains
Process (high-level):
•
•
•

Read one character at a time
Add one to the count for each character
read
Repeat the above 2 steps until there are no
more characters

Process (refinement):
Initialize Count to 0
REPEAT:
Read one character at a time
If a character is found, add 1
to Count
UNTIL there are no more characters

4. Coding and Documentation
This phase uses a programming language to write or implement
the actual programming instructions for the steps defined in the
previous phase. In this phase, we construct the actual program.
That means we write the program to solve the given problem using
programming languages like C, C++, Java, etc.,

•

5. Testing & Debugging
•

During this phase, we check whether the code written in the
previous step is solving the specified problem or not. That means
we test the program whether it is solving the problem for various
input data values or not. We also test whether it is providing the
desired output or not.

Syntax
• Syntax refers to the rules that define the structure and
format of valid statements and expressions in a
programming language. In other words, syntax specifies the
correct way to write a program in a particular language,
including the use of keywords, punctuation, and other
elements.

Grammar
• Grammar refers to a set of rules that define the structure of
a programming language. It encompasses syntax as well as
rules for composing expressions, statements, and program
structures. A programming language's grammar specifies
how its various elements can be combined to create valid
programs.

Semantics
• Semantics refers to the meaning of a program, or the way in
which a program behaves when it is executed. It involves
understanding how the various constructs in a program
interact with each other, and how they operate on data to
produce results. A program's semantics are determined by
its syntax and grammar, as well as the underlying
algorithms and data structures it uses to perform its tasks.

Program Errors
• Syntax Errors​
• Errors in grammar of the language​
• Runtime error​
• When there are no syntax errors, but the program can’t complete
execution​
• Divide by zero​
• Invalid input data​
• Logical errors​
• The program completes execution, but delivers incorrect results​
• Incorrect usage of parentheses​

Debugging
• Bug
• In the context of software development, it refers to an error, flaw
or fault in a computer program that causes it to behave in
unexpected or unintended ways. Bugs can be caused by a
variety of factors such as programming errors, software design
flaws, hardware malfunctions, and unexpected inputs.
• Debugging
• is the process of identifying, isolating, and fixing bugs in
computer programs.

6. Maintenance
•

During this phase, the program is actively used by the users. If
any enhancements found in this phase, all the phases are to be
repeated to make the enhancements. That means in this phase,
the solution (program) is used by the end-user. If the user
encounters any problem or wants any enhancement, then we
need to repeat all the phases from the starting, so that the
encountered problem is solved or enhancement is added.

Flowchart
•
•

•

A schematic representation of a sequence of operations, as in
manufacturing process or computer program
A graphical representation of the sequence of operations in an
information system or program. Information system flowcharts
show how data flows from source documents through the
computer to final distribution to users. Program flowcharts show
the sequence of instructions in a single program or subroutine.
Different symbols are used to draw each type of flowchart.
In the workplace, flowcharts are often used by programmers to
organize and share their ideas. In fact, they are so useful that most
professions use them to communicate how a process works
including engineers, scientists, manufacturers, business managers,
and health care workers.

Guidelines for Developing Flowcharts
•

Flowchart can have only one start and one stop symbol

•

On-page connectors are referenced using numbers

•

Off-page connectors are referenced using alphabets

•

General flow of processes is top to bottom or left to right

•

Arrows should not cross each other

Flowcharting
Symbols

Supply Request

Firmware Update

Crossing Traffic

Found Food in Fridge

Flowcharting

Flowcharting

Flowcharting

Activity
•

Draw a flowchart to convert the length in feet to centimeter.

Algorithm:
-Input the length in feet
-Calculate the length in cm by multiplying length in feet with 30.48
-Print length in cm

Activity
•

Draw a flowchart that
•
will read the two sides of a rectangle and
•
calculate its area.

Algorithm
1.
Input the width (W) and Length (L) of a rectangle
2.
Calculate the area (A) by multiplying L with W
3.
Print the area (A)
Pseudocode:
Step 1 Input W,L
Step 2 A = L x W
Step 3 Print A

Activity
•

Draw a flowchart that of a program that will compute and print the net pay an employee.
You need to ask for the input of the employee’s rate and hours worked and deductions.
Compute the gross pay by multiplying the rate hours worked. You can get the net pay by
subtracting the deductions from the gross pay.

Algorithm
1. Input the hours worked , rate and deductions
2. Calculate the gross pay by multiplying hours worked with rate
3. Calculate the netpay = grosspay - deduction
4. Print the netpay.
Pseudocode:
Step 1 Input hrs, rate, deduction
Step 2 gp = hrs * rate
Step 3 netpay = gp – deduction
Step 4 Print netpay

Flowcharts for decision making
Computers are used extensively for performing various types of
analysis. The decision symbol is used in flowcharts to indicate it.
• The general format of steps for flowcharting is as follows:
• Perform the test of the condition.
• If condition evaluates true branch to Yes steps.
• If condition evaluates false branch to No steps.
•

Flowcharting

Flowcharting

Flowcharting

Example
•

Write an algorithm and draw a flowchart that determine the student’s final grade and
indicate whether it is passing or failing. The passing grade is 75.

Algorithm
1. Input the prelim, midterm and final scores of the student
2. Calculate the average by summing all the scores and divide by 3
3. Check if the average is greater than 75
4. If the average is greater than or equal to 75, print “Passed”,
otherwise print “Failed”.
Pseudocode:
Step 1 Input prelim, midterm and final grade
Step 2 Compute average = (prelim+midterm+final)/3
Step 2 Is average >= 75
Print “Passed”
else
Print “Failed”

Example
•

Write an algorithm and draw a flowchart that
check whether the triangle is equilateral, isosceles
or scalene.
• Equilateral triangle: All three sides are equal.
• Isosceles triangle: All two sides are equal.
• Scalene triangle: No sides are equal.

Algorithm
1. Get the three sides of the triangle
2. If side1 is equal to side2 and side2 is equal to
side3, the triangle is equilateral.
3. If side1 is equal to side2 or side2 is equal to side3
or side3 is equal side1, the triangle is isosceles.
4. Otherwise, the triangle is scalene.

Activity
•

Write an algorithm and draw a flowchart that
•
Determine if the number is odd or even

Algorithm
1.
Input a number
2.
Check if a number is odd or even
3.
Print the result
Pseudocode:
Step 1 Input num
Step 2 Get the remainder by dividing num to 2
Step 3 If remainder = 0 print “The number is EVEN”, otherwise print “The number is ODD”

Flowcharts for loops
•

Looping refers to the repeated use of one or more steps. i.e. the statement or block of
statements within the loop are executed repeatedly.
•
There are two types of loops.
•
One is known as the fixed loop where the operations are repeated a fixed number of
times. In this case, the values of the variables within the loop have no effect on the
number of times the loop is to be executed.
•
In the other type which is known as the variable loop, the operations are repeated until
a specific condition is met. Here, the number of times the loop is repeated can vary.
•
The loop process in general includes :
•
Setting and initializing a counter
•
Execution of operations
•
Testing the completion of operations
•
Incrementing the counter
•
The test could either be to determine whether the loop has executed the specified number
of times, or whether a specified condition has been met.

Example
•

Draw a flowchart that find Even number between 1 to
50

The steps are :
1. Start
2. Initialize number (I) to 1
3. Check if I is > 50, if true goto Step 8
4. Get the remainder by using modulo of I % 2
5. If remainder is equal to 0, Print I.
6. Increment the value of I by 1.
7. Goto Step 3
8. Stop

1
1

True
False

Activity
•

Write an algorithm and draw a flowchart to find the average of all
odd numbers from 1 to 100

THANK YOU!

